=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl53110delta - what is new for perl v5.31.10

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.31.9 release and the 5.31.10
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.31.8, first read
L<perl5319delta>, which describes differences between 5.31.8 and 5.31.9.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 Unicode 13.0 is supported

See L<https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode13.0.0/> for details.

=head2 It is now possible to write C<qr/\p{Name=...}/>, or
C<qr!\p{na=/(SMILING|GRINNING) FACE/}!>

The Unicode Name property is now accessible in regular expression
patterns, as an alternative to C<\N{...}>.
A comparison of the two methods is given in
L<perlunicode/Comparison of \N{...} and \p{name=...}>.

The second example above shows that wildcard subpatterns are also usable
in this property.  See L<perlunicode/Wildcards in Property Values>.

=head2 Chained comparisons capability

Some comparison operators, as their associativity, I<chain> with some
operators of the same precedence (but never with operators of different
precedence).

    if ( $x < $y <= $z ) {...}

behaves exactly like:

    if ( $x < $y && $y <= $z ) {...}

(assuming that C<"$y"> is as simple a scalar as it looks.)

You can read more about this in L<perlop> under
L<perlop/Operator Precedence and Associativity>.

=head1 Obituary

Jeff Goff (JGOFF or DrForr), an integral part of the Perl and Raku
communities and a dear friend to all of us, has passed away on March
13th, 2020. DrForr was a prominent member of the communities, attending
and speaking at countless events, contributing to numerous projects,
and assisting and helping in any way he could.

His passing leaves a hole in our hearts and in our communities and he
will be sorely missed.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.31.10 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.31.9 and contains approximately 17,000 lines of changes across 180 files
from 29 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 9,000 lines of changes to 85 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.31.10:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Dan
Book, Daniel Dragan, Dave Rolsky, David Cantrell, David Mitchell, Hauke D,
H.Merijn Brand, Hugo van der Sanden, James E Keenan, John Lightsey, Karen
Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Nicolas R., Pali, Paul Evans, Peter Oliver,
Renee Baecker, Richard Leach, Sawyer X, Shlomi Fish, Stefan Seifert, Steve
Hay, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook, Yves Orton, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
