=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5210delta - what is new for perl v5.21.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.21.0 release and the 5.20.0
release.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.36 to 1.37.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 3.10 to 5.021001.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<CGI> has been removed from the core.  It is still available on the CPAN.

=item *

L<Module::Build> has been removed from the core.  It is still available on the
CPAN.

=item *

L<Package::Constants> has been removed from the core.  It is still available on
the CPAN.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.21.0 represents approximately 12 hours of development since Perl 5.20.0
and contains approximately 44,000 lines of changes across 190 files from 1
author.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 33,000 lines of changes to 140 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.21.0:

Nicholas Clark, Ricardo Signes.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
https://rt.perl.org/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
