=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5350delta - what is new for perl v5.35.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.34.0 release and the 5.35.0
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.32.0, first read
L<perl5340delta>, which describes differences between 5.32.0 and 5.34.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.64 to 1.65.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20210520 to 5.20210521.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.35.0 represents approximately 8 hours of wallclock time since Perl
5.34.0 and contains approximately 3,300 lines of changes across 40 files from 1
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 64 lines of changes to 6 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers.  For a more complete list of all of Perl's
historical contributors, please see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source
distribution.

Special thanks go to Sawyer X, who released perl v5.34.0 earlier today after
four years of work managing the project.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
