=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl53910delta - what is new for perl v5.39.10

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.75 to 1.76.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.210 to 2.212.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.209 to 2.212.

=item *

L<experimental> has been upgraded from version 0.031 to 0.032.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.86 to 1.88.

=item *

L<IO::Compress> has been upgraded from version 2.207 to 2.212.

=item *

L<locale> has been upgraded from version 1.11 to 1.12.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20240320 to 5.20240420.

=item *

L<podlators> has been upgraded from version 5.01 to 5.01_01.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 2.18 to 2.19.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.037 to 2.038.

=item *

L<Test2::Suite> has been upgraded from version 0.000159 to 0.000162.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302198 to 1.302199.

=item *

L<warnings> has been upgraded from version 1.68 to 1.69.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.35 to 1.36.

=back

=head1 Known Problems

=over 4

=item *

fork() failures on cygwin with C<-DDEBUGGING> builds.

Perl uses the C<--enable-auto-image-base> option to set the base
images for DLLs for C<cygperl5_39_10.dll> and the DLLs needed for
dynamically loaded modules on cygwin.

With 5.39.10 if perl is built with C<-DDEBUGGING> or possibly other
options that increase the address space used by F<cygperl5_39_10.dll>,
the address space for F<cygperl5_39_10.dll> overlaps with the address
space allocated for F<mro.dll>.

The C<mro> module will still load, but if perl attempts to fork you
will likely see an error like:

 0 [main] perl 34054 child_info_fork::abort: address space needed by \
    'mro.dll' (0x400000) is already occupied

You can workaround this by building without the C<-DDEBUGGING> option,
or by making C<mro> a static extension:

  ./Configure ... -Astatic_ext=mro

We expect the name change of the F<cygperl5_39_10.dll> to
F<cygperl5_39_11.dll> in 5.39.11 will fix this problem for the next
release.  [L<github #22104|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/22104>]

=back
