=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl52512delta - what is new for perl v5.25.12

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.25.11 release and the 5.25.12
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.25.10, first read
L<perl52511delta>, which describes differences between 5.25.10 and 5.25.11.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<base> has been upgraded from version 2.24 to 2.25.

=item *

L<CPAN> has been upgraded from version 2.17 to 2.18.

=item *

L<DynaLoader> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20170320 to
5.20170420.

=item *

L<Safe> has been upgraded from version 2.39 to 2.40.

=item *

L<threads::shared> has been upgraded from version 1.55 to 1.56.

=item *

L<XSLoader> has been upgraded from version 0.26 to 0.27.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

=head2 New Diagnostics

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

Since C<.> is now removed from C<@INC> by default, C<do> will now trigger
a warning recommending to fix the C<do> statement:

L<do "%s" failed, '.' is no longer in @INC|perldiag/do "%s" failed, '.' is no longer in @INC; did you mean do ".E<sol>%s"?>

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

When a C<require> fails, we now do not provide C<@INC> when the C<require>
is for a file instead of a module.

=item *

When C<@INC> is not scanned for a C<require> call, we no longer display
C<@INC> to avoid confusion.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.25.12 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.25.11
and contains approximately 1,700 lines of changes across 150 files from 8
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 700 lines of changes to 73 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.25.12:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, David Mitchell, James E
Keenan, Jarkko Hietaniemi, Karl Williamson, Pali, Sawyer X.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
