=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5357delta - what is new for perl v5.35.7

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.35.6 release and the 5.35.7
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.35.5, first read
L<perl5356delta>, which describes differences between 5.35.5 and 5.35.6.


=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 builtin Functions

A new core module L<builtin> has been added, which provides documentation for
new always-present functions that are built into the interpreter.

    say "Reference type of arrays is ", builtin::reftype([]);

It also provides a lexical import mechanism for providing short name versions
of these functions.

    use builtin 'reftype';
    say "Reference type of arrays is ", reftype([]);

An initial set of functions exists to provide convenient access to stable
boolean values, weakening references, and inspecting properties of references.

This builtin function mechanism and the functions it provides are all
currently B<experimental>.

For more information, see the L<builtin> module.


=head1 Modules and Pragmata


=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.59 to 1.60.

=item *

L<CPAN> has been upgraded from version 2.28 to 2.29.
This was part of the fixes for
L<CPAN vulnerabilities related to checksums|http://blogs.perl.org/users/neilb/2021/11/addressing-cpan-vulnerabilities-related-to-checksums.html>.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> has been upgraded from version 7.62 to 7.64.
This has fixes for OS390, documentation fixes, and some minor enhancements.

=item *

L<File::Compare> has been upgraded from version 1.1006 to 1.1007.

=item *

L<File::Copy> has been upgraded from version 2.37 to 2.38.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.82 to 3.83.

=item *

L<Hash::Util> has been upgraded from version 0.26 to 0.27.

=item *

L<Hash::Util::FieldHash> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

=item *

L<IO> has been upgraded from version 1.48 to 1.49.

=item *

L<JSON::PP> has been upgraded from version 4.06 to 4.07.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.999827 to 1.999828.
This:
adds new methods numerator(), denominator(), and fparts();
includes a bug fix in to_ieee754();
and fixes some typos.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20211120 to 5.20211220.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.54 to 1.55.

=item *

L<overload> has been upgraded from version 1.33 to 1.34.

=back




=head1 Platform Support


=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item z/OS

This update enables us to build EBCDIC static/dynamic
and 31-bit/64-bit addressing mode Perl. The number of
tests that pass is consistent with the baseline before
these updates.

These changes also provide the base support to be able to provide
ASCII static/dynamic and 31-bit/64-bit addressing mode Perl.

=back


=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item * A new phase_name() interface provides access to the name
for each interpreter phase (i.e., PL_phase value).

=item * The changes in v5.35.5 for how memory for hash iterator state was allocated could cause unbounded memory consumption (until process exit). The bug that caused this has been fixed - memory consumption is now stable, and potentially lower than v5.35.4 and earlier.

=for The v5.36.0 perldelta, just drop the paragraph about the bugfix.

=back


=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

When bareword filehandles are disabled, the parser was interpreting
any bareword as a filehandle, even when immediatey followed by parens.

This fixes L<#19271|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19271>

=back


=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.35.7 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.35.6 and contains approximately 21,000 lines of changes across 230 files
from 18 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 19,000 lines of changes to 170 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.35.7:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Felipe Gasper, Graham
Knop, Jakub Wilk, James E Keenan, James Raspass, Karl Williamson, Michiel
Beijen, Mike Fulton, Neil Bowers, Nicholas Clark, Paul Evans, Richard Leach,
Steve Hay, TAKAI Kousuke, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.


=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
