=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.15.9

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.15.8 release and
the 5.15.9 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.15.7, first read
L<perl5158delta>, which describes differences between 5.15.7 and
5.15.8.

=head1 Notice

This space intentionally left blank.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 C<< no feature; >> now means reset to default

C<< no feature >> now resets to the default feature set.  To disable all
features (which is likely to be a pretty special-purpose request, since
it presumably won't match any named set of semantics) you can now  
write C<< no feature ':all' >>.


[ List each enhancement as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Security

XXX Any security-related notices go here.  In particular, any security
vulnerabilities closed should be noted here rather than in the
L</Selected Bug Fixes> section.

[ List each security issue as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Incompatible Changes

XXX For a release on a stable branch, this section aspires to be:

    There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.XXX.XXX
    If any exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a
    report.  See L</Reporting Bugs> below.

[ List each incompatible change as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Deprecations

=head2 Literal C<< "{" >> characters in regular expressions.

It has been documented that the current plans include requiring a
literal C<< "{" >> to be escaped: 5.18 will emit deprecation warnings,
and it will be required in 5.20.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Fix a slowdown in freeing nested hashes. This may speedup the exit of 
certain programs.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

XXX All changes to installed files in F<cpan/>, F<dist/>, F<ext/> and F<lib/>
go here.  If Module::CoreList is updated, generate an initial draft of the
following sections using F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl>, which prints stub
entries to STDOUT.  Results can be pasted in place of the '=head2' entries
below.  A paragraph summary for important changes should then be added by hand.
In an ideal world, dual-life modules would have a F<Changes> file that could be
cribbed.

[ Within each section, list entries as a =item entry ]

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<XXX> has been upgraded from version 0.69 to version 0.70.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Documentation

XXX Changes to files in F<pod/> go here.  Consider grouping entries by
file and be sure to link to the appropriate page, e.g. L<perlfunc>.

=head2 New Documentation

XXX Changes which create B<new> files in F<pod/> go here.

=head3 L<XXX>

XXX Description of the purpose of the new file here

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

XXX Changes which significantly change existing files in F<pod/> go here.
However, any changes to F<pod/perldiag.pod> should go in the L</Diagnostics>
section.

=head3 L<XXX>

=over 4

=item *

XXX Description of the change here

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

XXX New or changed warnings emitted by the core's C<C> code go here. Also
include any changes in L<perldiag> that reconcile it to the C<C> code.

[ Within each section, list entries as a =item entry that links to perldiag,
  e.g.

  =item *

  L<Invalid version object|perldiag/"Invalid version object">
]

=head2 New Diagnostics

XXX Newly added diagnostic messages go here
=item *

L<lvalue attribute %s already-defined subroutine|perldiag/"lvalue attribute %s already-defined subroutine">, which replaces
C<< lvalue attribute cannot be removed after the subroutine has been defined >>.

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

XXX L<message|perldiag/"message">

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

XXX L<message|perldiag/"message">

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

XXX Changes (i.e. rewording) of diagnostic messages go here

=over 4

=item *

XXX Describe change here

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

XXX Changes to installed programs such as F<perlbug> and F<xsubpp> go
here. Most of these are built within the directories F<utils> and F<x2p>.

[ List utility changes as a =head3 entry for each utility and =item
entries for each change
Use L<XXX> with program names to get proper documentation linking. ]

=head3 L<XXX>

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

XXX Changes to F<Configure>, F<installperl>, F<installman>, and analogous tools
go here.  Any other changes to the Perl build process should be listed here.
However, any platform-specific changes should be listed in the
L</Platform Support> section, instead.

[ List changes as a =item entry ].

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Testing

XXX Any significant changes to the testing of a freshly built perl should be
listed here.  Changes which create B<new> files in F<t/> go here as do any
large changes to the testing harness (e.g. when parallel testing was added).
Changes to existing files in F<t/> aren't worth summarising, although the bugs
that they represent may be covered elsewhere.

[ List each test improvement as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

F<< t/op/require_37033.t>> has been added, to test that C<require> always closes
the file handle that it opens. Previously, it had been leaking the file handle
if it happened to have file descriptor 0, which would happen if C<require> was
called (explicitly or implicitly) when C<STDIN> had been closed.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

XXX Any changes to platform support should be listed in the sections below.

[ Within the sections, list each platform as a =item entry with specific
changes as paragraphs below it. ]

=head2 New Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl compiles on, that previous
versions did not. These will either be enabled by new files in the F<hints/>
directories, or new subdirectories and F<README> files at the top level of the
source tree.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl no longer compiles on.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

XXX List any changes for specific platforms. This could include configuration
and compilation changes or changes in portability/compatibility.  However,
changes within modules for platforms should generally be listed in the
L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=over 4

=item XXX-some-platform

XXX

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

XXX Changes which affect the interface available to C<XS> code go here.
Other significant internal changes for future core maintainers should
be noted as well.

[ List each change as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

XXX Important bug fixes in the core language are summarised here.
Bug fixes in files in F<ext/> and F<lib/> are best summarised in
L</Modules and Pragmata>.

[ List each fix as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

I<Takri> is now considered a script that uses two characters. This corrects
a Unicode 6.1 omission.

=item *

C<< perlfunc.hmtl >> is now being generated again. [perl #107870]

=item *

C<< $$ >> is no longer tainted. Since this value comes directly from
C<< getpid() >>, it is always safe.

=item *

Fix leaking a file handle. [perl #37033]

=item *

An off-by-one error caused C<< /[:upper:]/ >> and C<< /[:punct:]/ >> to
unexepectly match characters with code points above 255. This has been
rectified. [perl 111400].

=item *

C<< (?foo: ...) >> no longer loses passed in character set.

=item *

Allow attributes to set C<< :lvalue >> on a defined sub. [perl 107366].

=item *

C<< die; >> with a non-reference, non-string value in $@ now properly
propgates that value [perl #111654].

=item *

C<< Term::ReadLine >> now uses AnyEvent instead of Tk for an event loop.


=back

=head1 Known Problems

XXX Descriptions of platform agnostic bugs we know we can't fix go here. Any
tests that had to be C<TODO>ed for the release would be noted here, unless
they were specific to a particular platform (see below).

This is a list of some significant unfixed bugs, which are regressions
from either 5.XXX.XXX or 5.XXX.XXX.

[ List each fix as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Obituary

XXX If any significant core contributor has died, we've added a short obituary
here.

=head1 Acknowledgements

XXX Redo this on 2012-03-20

Perl 5.15.9 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.15.8
and contains approximately 74,000 lines of changes across 470 files from 23
authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.15.9:

Aaron Crane, Abigail, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dave Rolsky,
David Cantrell, David Golden, David Mitchell, Eric Brine, Father Chrysostomos,
Florian Ragwitz, James E Keenan, Jesse Vincent, Karl Williamson, Marc Green,
Max Maischein, Nicholas Clark, Pau Amma, Reini Urban, Ricardo Signes, Tony
Cook, Yves Orton, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes
all the core committers, who will be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently
distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details
on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
