=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5338delta - what is new for perl v5.33.8

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.33.7 release and the 5.33.8
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.33.6, first read
L<perl5337delta>, which describes differences between 5.33.6 and 5.33.7.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Fix a memory leak in RegEx (L<GH #18604|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18604>)

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.100 to 2.101.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.100 to 2.101.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.176 to 2.177.

=item *

L<IO::Compress> has been upgraded from version 2.100 to 2.102.

- bin/zipdetails version 2.02

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20210220 to 5.20210320.

=item *

L<Pod::Html> has been upgraded from version 1.26 to 1.27.

=item *

L<Win32> has been upgraded from version 0.54 to 0.57.

- fix calling convention for PFNRegGetValueA
- added Win32::IsSymlinkCreationAllowed(), Win32::IsDeveloperModeEnabled(),
          and Win32::GetProcessPrivileges()
- removed old code for versions before Windows 2000

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlfunc> and L<perlsyn>

=over 4

=item *

Document that caller() does not see try{} blocks

=back

=head3 L<perlgit>

=over 4

=item *

document how to create a remote-tracking branch for every PR

=item *

document how to get a PR as a local branch

=back

=head3 L<perlunifaq>

=over 4

=item *

Fix description of what Perl does with unencoded strings

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and
changes in this release.  Furthermore, these significant changes were
made:

=over 4

=item *

Split Config-dependent tests in t/opbasic/arith.t to t/op/arith2.t

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

A set of cop_hints_exists_{pv,pvn,pvs,sv} functions was added, to support checking
for the existence of keys in the hints hash of a specific cop without needing to
create a mortal copy of said value.

=item *

An aid has been added for using the C<DEBUG> macros when debugging XS or
C code. The comments in F<perl.h> describe C<DEBUG_PRE_STMTS> and
C<DEBUG_POST_STMTS>. which you can C<#define> to do things like save and
restore C<errno>, in case the C<DEBUG> calls are interfering with that,
or to display timestamps, or which thread it's coming from, or the
location of the call, or whatever.  You can make a quick hack to help
you track something down without having to edit individual C<DEBUG>
calls.

=item *

Make REFCOUNTED_HE_EXISTS available outside of core

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Fix a memory leak in regcomp.c (L<GH #18604|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18604>)

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.33.8 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.33.7 and contains approximately 3,300 lines of changes across 120 files
from 15 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 1,100 lines of changes to 66 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.33.8:

Aaron Crane, brian d foy, Craig A. Berry, David Mitchell, Felipe Gasper,
James E Keenan, Karl Williamson, Keith Thompson, Leon Timmermans, Nicolas
R., Paul Evans, Renee Baecker, Ricardo Signes, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
