=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5272delta - what is new for perl v5.27.2

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.27.1 release and the 5.27.2
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.27.0, first read
L<perl5271delta>, which describes differences between 5.27.0 and 5.27.1.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 Unicode 10.0 is supported

A list of changes is at
L<http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode10.0.0>.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<arybase> has been upgraded from version 0.12 to 0.13.

=item *

L<Carp> has been upgraded from version 1.42 to 1.43.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.88 to 2.92.

=item *

L<encoding> has been upgraded from version 2.19 to 2.20.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> has been upgraded from version 0.280225 to 0.280228.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.48 to 1.49.

=item *

L<File::Glob> has been upgraded from version 1.28 to 1.29.

=item *

L<File::Spec> and L<Cwd> have been upgraded from version 3.67 to 3.68.

=item *

L<List::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.46_02 to 1.48.

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2611 to 0.2613.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20170621 to 5.20170720.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.39 to 1.40.

=item *

L<PerlIO::scalar> has been upgraded from version 0.27 to 0.29.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 1.76 to 1.77.

=item *

L<re> has been upgraded from version 0.34 to 0.35.

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.46_02 to 1.48.

=item *

L<Time::HiRes> has been upgraded from version 1.9741 to 1.9743.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.31 to 1.3201.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

List assignment (C<aassign>) could in some rare cases allocate an
entry on the mortal stack and leave the entry uninitialized. [perl
#131570]

=item *

Attempting to apply an attribute to an C<our> variable where a
function of that name already exists could result in a NULL pointer
being supplied where an SV was expected, crashing perl.  [perl
#131597]

=item *

C<split ' '> now correctly handles the argument being split when in the
scope of the L<< C<unicode_strings>|feature/"The 'unicode_strings' feature"
>> feature. Previously, when a string using the single-byte internal
representation contained characters that are whitespace by Unicode rules but
not by ASCII rules, it treated those characters as part of fields rather
than as field separators.  [perl #130907]

=item *

Several built-in functions previously had bugs that could cause them to
write to the internal stack without allocating room for the item being
written. In rare situations, this could have led to a crash. These bugs have
now been fixed, and if any similar bugs are introduced in future, they will
be detected automatically in debugging builds.

=item *

Using a symbolic ref with postderef syntax as the key in a hash lookup was
yielding an assertion failure on debugging builds. [perl #131627]

=item *

Array and hash variables whose names begin with a caret now admit indexing
inside their curlies when interpolated into strings, as in C<<
"${^CAPTURE[0]}" >> to index C<@{^CAPTURE}>.  [perl #131664]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.27.2 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.27.1
and contains approximately 26,000 lines of changes across 290 files from 18
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 9,700 lines of changes to 150 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.27.2:

Aaron Crane, Alberto Simões, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dagfinn Ilmari
Mannsåker, David Mitchell, E. Choroba, Eric Herman, Father Chrysostomos, James
E Keenan, Karl Williamson, Lukas Mai, Ricardo Signes, Sawyer X, Steve Hay, Tony
Cook, Vitali Peil, Yves Orton, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
