=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5373delta - what is new for perl v5.37.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.37.2 release and the 5.37.3
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.37.1, first read
L<perl5372delta>, which describes differences between 5.37.1 and 5.37.2.


=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 PERL_RAND_SEED

Added a new environment variable C<PERL_RAND_SEED> which can be used to
cause a perl program which uses C<rand> without using C<srand()>
explicitly or which uses C<srand()> with no arguments to be repeatable.
See L<perlrun>. This feature can be disabled at compile time by passing

    -Accflags=-DNO_PERL_RAND_SEED

to F<Configure> during the build process.



=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Additional optree optimizations for common OP patterns. For example, multiple
simple OPs replaced by a single streamlined OP, so as to be more efficient at
runtime. L<[GH #19943]|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/pull/19943>.

=back


=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<attributes> has been upgraded from version 0.34 to 0.35.

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.85 to 1.86.

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.65 to 1.68.

=item *

L<Digest::SHA> has been upgraded from version 6.02 to 6.03.

=item *

L<DynaLoader> has been upgraded from version 1.52 to 1.53.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 3.18 to 3.19.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::PL2Bat> has been upgraded from version 0.004 to 0.005.

=item *

L<File::Find> has been upgraded from version 1.40 to 1.41.

=item *

L<Filter::Util::Call> has been upgraded from version 1.61 to 1.64.

=item *

L<HTTP::Tiny> has been upgraded from version 0.080 to 0.082:
no longer deletes the 'headers' key from post_form arguments hashref.

=item *

L<JSON::PP> has been upgraded from version 4.10 to 4.11.

=item *

L<Memoize> has been upgraded from version 1.03_01 to 1.10.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20220720 to 5.20220820.

=item *

L<NDBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.15 to 1.16.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.59 to 1.60.

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.62 to 1.63:
fix off-by-one in stack handling of head() / tail() (RT143905).

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.035 to 2.036:
Avoid putting macros inside arguments to other macros,
as it annoys strict C compilers

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.28 to 2.29.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.24 to 1.25.

=back




=head1 Platform Support


=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

=over 4

=item *

In some cases, timestamps returned by L<stat()|perlfunc/stat> and
L<lstat()|perlfunc/lstat> failed to take daylight saving time into account.
[L<GH #20018|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/20018>]
[L<GH #20061|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/20061>]

=back

=item FreeBSD

=over 4

=item *

FreeBSD no longer uses thread-safe locale operations, to avoid L<a bug in FreeBSD|https://bugs.freebsd.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=265950>

=back

=back


=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

The C<CVf_METHOD> CV flag and associated C<CvMETHOD> macro has been renamed to
C<CVf_NOWARN_AMBIGUOUS> and C<CvNOWARN_AMBIGUOUS>. This closer reflects its
actual behaviour (it suppresses a warning that would otherwise be generated
about ambiguous names), in order to be less confusing with a possible upcoming
feature.

=item *

The C<OPf_SPECIAL> flag is no longer set on the C<OP_ENTERSUB> op
constructed to call the C<VERSION>, C<import> and C<unimport> methods
as part of a C<use> statement and attribute application, nor when
assigning to an C<:lvalue> subroutine.

=item *

A new CV flag C<CVf_REFCOUNTED_ANYSV> has been added, which indicates that the
CV is an XSUB and stores an SV pointer in the C<CvXSUBANY.any_sv> union field.
Perl core operations such as cloning or destroying the CV will maintain the
reference count of the pointed-to SV, destroying it when required.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item * PerlIO::get_layers will now accept IO references too

Previously it would only take glob references or names of globs. Now it will
also accept IO references.

=back


=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.37.3 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.37.2 and contains approximately 13,000 lines of changes across 240 files
from 25 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 11,000 lines of changes to 160 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.37.3:

Aristotle Pagaltzis, Bram, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Dan Book, Dan Kogai,
David Golden, David Mitchell, Elvin Aslanov, Graham Knop, Harald Jörg,
James E Keenan, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Mark Shelor, Neil Bowers,
Nicholas Clark, Nicolas R, Paul Evans, Reini Urban, Richard Leach, Sinan
Unur, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook, Yves Orton, 小鸡.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.


=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
