=head1 NAME

perlintern - autogenerated documentation of purely B<internal>
		 Perl functions

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file is the autogenerated documentation of functions in the
Perl interpreter that are documented using Perl's internal documentation
format but are not marked as part of the Perl API. In other words,
B<they are not for use in extensions>!

=over 8

=item djSP

Declare Just C<SP>. This is actually identical to C<dSP>, and declares
a local copy of perl's stack pointer, available via the C<SP> macro.
See C<SP>.  (Available for backward source code compatibility with the
old (Perl 5.005) thread model.)

		djSP;

=for hackers
Found in file pp.h

=item is_gv_magical

Returns C<TRUE> if given the name of a magical GV.

Currently only useful internally when determining if a GV should be
created even in rvalue contexts.

C<flags> is not used at present but available for future extension to
allow selecting particular classes of magical variable.

	bool	is_gv_magical(char *name, STRLEN len, U32 flags)

=for hackers
Found in file gv.c

=item start_glob

Function called by C<do_readline> to spawn a glob (or do the glob inside
perl on VMS). This code used to be inline, but now perl uses C<File::Glob>
this glob starter is only used by miniperl during the build proccess.
Moving it away shrinks pp_hot.c; shrinking pp_hot.c helps speed perl up.

	PerlIO*	start_glob(SV* pattern, IO *io)

=for hackers
Found in file doio.c

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

The autodocumentation system was originally added to the Perl core by
Benjamin Stuhl. Documentation is by whoever was kind enough to
document their functions.

=head1 SEE ALSO

perlguts(1), perlapi(1)

