=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5314delta - what is new for perl v5.31.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.31.3 release and the 5.31.4
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.31.2, first read
L<perl5313delta>, which describes differences between 5.31.2 and 5.31.3.

=head1 Notice

I<None>

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 Now can dump compiled patterns before optimization

This is primarily useful for tracking down bugs in the regular
expression compiler.  This dump happens on C<-DDEBUGGING> perls, if you
specify C<-Drv> on the command line; or on any perl if the pattern is
compiled within the scope of S<C<use re qw(Debug DUMP_PRE_OPTIMIZE)>> or
S<C<use re qw(Debug COMPILE EXTRA)>>.  (All but the 2nd case display
other information as well.)

=head1 Incompatible Changes

    There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.31.3
    If any exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a
    report.  See L</Reporting Bugs> below.

=head1 Deprecations

=head2 Module removals

I<None>

=head1 Performance Enhancements

I<None>

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

I<None>

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> has been upgraded from version 7.36 to 7.38.

=item *

L<I18N::Langinfo> has been upgraded from version 0.18 to 0.19.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20190820 to 5.20190920.

=item *

L<Module::Metadata> has been upgraded from version 1.000036 to 1.000037.

=item *

L<re> has been upgraded from version 0.37 to 0.38.

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.50 to 1.52.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302166 to 1.302168.

=item *

L<Time::HiRes> has been upgraded from version 1.9762 to 1.9763.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.02 to 1.03.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

I<None>

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email
to L<perlbug@perl.org|mailto:perlbug@perl.org>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlapi>, L<perlintern>

=over 4

=item *

Documentation has been added for a dozen or two functions that were
lacking it before.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 New Diagnostics

I<None>

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Improvements in F<Configure> to detection in C++ and clang++.  Work ongoing by
Andy Dougherty. [perl #134171]

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Win32

The locale tests could crash on Win32 due to a Windows bug, and
separately due to the CRT throwing an exception if the locale name
wasn't validly encoded in the current code page.

For the second we now decode the locale name ourselves, and always
decode it as UTF-8.  [perl #133981]

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Perl no longer treats strings starting with "0x" or "0b" as hex or
binary numbers respectively when converting a string to a number.
This reverts a change in behaviour inadvertently introduced in perl
5.30.0 intended to improve precision when converting a string to a
floating point number. [perl #134230]

=item *

Matching a non-C<SVf_UTF8> string against a regular expression
containing unicode literals could leak a SV on each match attempt.
[perl #134390]

=item *

Overloads for octal and binary floating point literals were always
passed a string with a C<0x> prefix instead of the appropriate C<0> or
C<0b> prefix.  [perl #125557]

=back

=head1 Known Problems

I<None>

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.31.4 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.31.3 and contains approximately 6,700 lines of changes across 260 files
from 18 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 3,900 lines of changes to 180 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.31.4:

Chad Granum, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dan Book, David
Mitchell, Florian Weimer, Hauke D, H.Merijn Brand, James E Keenan, Kang-min
Liu, Karl Williamson, Max Maischein, Pali, Sisyphus, Tomasz Konojacki, Tom
Hukins, Tony Cook, VanL.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
