=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5372delta - what is new for perl v5.37.2

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.37.1 release and the 5.37.2
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.37.0, first read
L<perl5371delta>, which describes differences between 5.37.0 and 5.37.1.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Use C<Perl_fabs> rather than hand-coded abs expressions in C<sv.c>.

=item *

Replace a runtime check with compile-time static assertion in C<sv.c>.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

Added the C<is_tainted()> builtin function. [L<github #19854|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19854>]

=item *

Added the C<export_lexically()> builtin function as per PPC 0020. [L<github #19895|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19895>]

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<builtin> has been upgraded from version 0.007 to 0.008.

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.84 to 1.85.

=item *

L<B::Concise> has been upgraded from version 1.006 to 1.007.

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.64 to 1.65.

=item *

L<bignum> has been upgraded from version 0.65 to 0.66.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.103 to 2.201.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.105 to 2.202.

=item *

L<CPAN> has been upgraded from version 2.33 to 2.34.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.185 to 2.186.

=item *

L<DB_File> has been upgraded from version 1.857 to 1.858.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 3.17 to 3.18.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.74 to 1.75.

The C<bareword_filehandles> feature has been removed from the C<:5.38>
feature bundle. [L<github #19924|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19924>]

=item *

L<File::Glob> has been upgraded from version 1.37 to 1.38.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.85 to 3.86.

=item *

L<Filter::Util::Call> has been upgraded from version 1.60 to 1.61.

=item *

L<Hash::Util> has been upgraded from version 0.28 to 0.29.

=item *

L<IO::Compress> has been upgraded from version 2.106 to 2.201.

=item *

L<JSON::PP> has been upgraded from version 4.07 to 4.10.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.999830 to 1.999837.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt::FastCalc> has been upgraded from version 0.5012 to 0.5013.

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2621 to 0.2624.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20220620 to 5.20220720.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.58 to 1.59.

=item *

L<PerlIO::via::QuotedPrint> has been upgraded from version 0.09 to 0.10.

=item *

L<Pod::Checker> has been upgraded from version 1.74 to 1.75.

=item *

L<Pod::Usage> has been upgraded from version 2.01 to 2.03.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.033 to 2.035.

=item *

L<Storable> has been upgraded from version 3.26 to 3.27.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302190 to 1.302191.

=item *

L<Text::Balanced> has been upgraded from version 2.04 to 2.06.

=item *

L<threads::shared> has been upgraded from version 1.64 to 1.65.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=over 4

=item *

Perl API: Better documentation of experimental and deprecated elements.

=item *

Add comments better explaining ANYOF nodes in C<regcomp.h>

=item *

perlunicode: Clarify user-defined properties

=item *

regex: Add POSIXA1R node

=item *

Improve sorting of documentation for better reading.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Properly populate osvers on Dragonfly BSD when the hostname isn't set.

=item *

Fix typos for C99 macro name PRIX64.

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item DragonflyBSD

Skip tests to workaround an apparent bug in setproctitle().  [L<github #19894|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19894>]

=item FreeBSD

Replace the first part of archname with `uname -p` [L<github #19791|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19791>]

=item Synology

Update Synology Readme for DSM 7.

=item Solaris

Avoid some compiler and compilation issues on NetBSD/Solaris from regexec.c and regcomp.c.

=item Windows

Fix win32 memory alignment needed for gcc-12 from vmem.h.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

New formatting symbols were added for printing values declared as U32 or
I32:

=over

=item I32df -- Like %d

=item U32of -- Like %o

=item U32uf -- Like %u

=item U32xf -- Like %x

=item U32Xf -- Like %X

=back

These are used in the same way already existing similar symbols, such as
C<IVdf>, are used.  See L<perlapi/I/O Formats>.

=item *

new 'HvHasAUX' macro

=item *

regexec.c: Add some branch predictions reorder conds

=item *

locale: Change macro name to be C conformant

=item *

Rename the C<PADNAMEt_*> constants to C<PADNAMEf_*>

=item *

Changes all the API macros that retrieve a PV into a call to an
inline function so as to evaluate the parameter just once.

=item *

regexec.c: multiple code refactor to make the code more readable

=item *

perl.h: Change macro name to be C conformant
(remove leading _ from NOT_IN_NUMERIC macros)

=item *

regcomp.h: add new C<BITMAP_BIT> macro in addition to the existing C<BITMAP_BYTE>
and C<BITMAP_TEST> ones.

=item *

Create new regnode type ANYOFH.
populate_ANYOF_from_invlist was renamed to populate_bitmap_from_invlist

=item *

regex: Refactor bitmap vs non-bitmap of qr/[]/

=item *

regcomp.c: add new functions to convert from an inversion list to a bitmap (and vice versa)
C<populate_bitmap_from_invlist> and C<populate_invlist_from_bitmap>.

=item *

Add C<newAVav()> to create an AV from an existing AV.
Add C<newAVhv()> to create an AV using keys and values from an existing HV.

=item *

Fix definition of C<Perl_atof>.

=item *

Fix undefined behavior with overflow related OPTIMIZE_INFTY and delta
in C<regcomp.c>.

=item *

Fix regnode pointer alignment issue in <regcomp.h>.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Disabling the C<bareword_filehandles> feature no longer treats C<< print
Class->method >> as an error.  [L<github #19704|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19704>]

=item *

When a Perl subroutine tail-calls an XS subroutine using C<goto &xs_sub>,
the XS subroutine can now correctly determine its calling context.
Previously it was always reported as scalar.

In addition, where the Perl subroutine is freed at the same time:

    sub foo { *foo = sub {}; goto &xs_sub }

this formerly could lead to crashes if the XS subroutine tried to use the
value of C<PL_op>, since this was being set to NULL. This is now fixed.

[L<github #19936|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19936>]

=item *

setsockopt() now uses the mechanism added in 5.36 to better
distinguish between numeric and string values supplied as the
C<OPTVAL> parameter.  [L<github #18761|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18761>]

=item *

4-argument C<select()> now rejects strings with code points above
255. Additionally, for code points 128-255, this operator will now always
give the corresponding octet to the OS, regardless of how Perl stores
such code points in memory. (Previously Perl leaked its internal string
storage to the OS.) [L<github #19882|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19882>]

=item *

Fix panic issue from C<val {} inside /(?{...})/> [L<github #19390|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19390>]

=item *

Fix multiple compiler warnings from regexp.c., locale.c [L<github #19915|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19915>]

=item *

Fix querying locale without LC_NUMERIC on platform [L<github #19890|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19890>]

=item *

Prevent undefined behaviour in C<S_maybe_multideref()>.

=item *

Avoid signed integer overflow in C<use integer> ops.

=item *

Avoid adding an offset to a NULL pointer in C<hv_delete_common>.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.37.2 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.37.1 and contains approximately 35,000 lines of changes across 440 files
from 24 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 30,000 lines of changes to 350 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.37.2:

Branislav Zahradník, Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Dan Kogai,
David Mitchell, Felipe Gasper, Graham Knop, H.Merijn Brand, James E Keenan,
James Raspass, Karl Williamson, Kenichi Ishigaki, Leon Timmermans, Loren
Merritt, Marcel Telka, Matthew Horsfall, Nicolas R, Paul Evans, Ricardo
Signes, Richard Leach, Sisyphus, TAKAI Kousuke, Tony Cook, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
