=head1 NAME

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.8.10

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.8.9 release and
the 5.8.10 release.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.8.9.
If any exist, they are bugs and reports are welcome.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head1 Utility Changes

=head1 New Documentation

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=head1 Installation and Configuration Improvements

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=head1 New or Changed Diagnostics

=head1 Changed Internals

=head1 New Tests

=head1 Known Problems

=head1 Platform Specific Problems

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://bugs.perl.org.  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the B<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.  You can browse and search
the Perl 5 bugs at http://bugs.perl.org/

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send
it to perl5-security-report@perl.org. This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who be able
to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported. Please only use this address for security
issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for exhaustive details on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
