=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5191delta - what is new for perl v5.19.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.19.0 release and the 5.19.1
release.

=head1 Core Enhancements

No new features have been added.

=head1 Security

There are no new security issues.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

=head2 Most regex engine global state eliminated

As part of this series of fixes it was necessary to change the API of
Perl_re_intuit_start().  See L</Internal Changes> for more.

=head2 Locale decimal point character no longer leaks outside of S<C<use locale>> scope

This is actually a bug fix, but some code has come to rely on the bug
being present, so this change is listed here.  The current locale that
the program is running under is not supposed to be visible to Perl code
except within the scope of a S<C<use locale>>.  However, until now under
certain circumstances, the character used for a decimal point (often a
comma) leaked outside the scope.  If your code is affected by this
change, simply add a S<C<use locale>>.

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Perl has a new copy-on-write mechanism that avoids the need to copy the
internal string buffer when assigning from one scalar to another. This
makes copying large strings appear much faster.  Modifying one of the two
(or more) strings after an assignment will force a copy internally. This
makes it unnecessary to pass strings by reference for efficiency.

This feature was already available in 5.18.0, but wasn't enabled by
default. It is the default now, and so you no longer need build perl with
the F<Configure> argument:

    -Accflags=PERL_NEW_COPY_ON_WRITE

It can be disabled (for now) in a perl build with:

    -Accflags=PERL_NO_COW

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Archive::Tar> has been upgraded from version 1.90 to 1.92.

=item *

L<Attribute::Handlers> has been upgraded from version 0.94 to 0.95.

=item *

L<autodie> has been upgraded from version 2.13 to 2.19.

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.42 to 1.43.

=item *

L<B::Concise> has been upgraded from version 0.95 to 0.96.

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.20 to 1.21.

C<foreach my $lexical> is now deparsed correctly with the B<-p> option.
[RT #117081]

The B<-l> option no longer puts form feeds in the middle of a line when
outputting C<map> and C<grep> blocks. [RT #117311]

Elements of C<%#>, such as C<$# {foo}> and C<${#}{foo}> are now deparsed
correctly. [RT #117531]

=item *

L<Benchmark> has been upgraded from version 1.15 to 1.16.

=item *

L<Carp> has been upgraded from version 1.29 to 1.30.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.060 to 2.061.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.060 to 2.061.

=item *

L<Config::Perl::V> has been upgraded from version 0.17 to 0.18.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta> has been upgraded from version 2.120921 to 2.131560.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.145 to 2.146.

=item *

L<DB> has been updated from 1.05 to 1.06 and L<perl5db.pl> from 1.39_10
to 1.40.

The call depth allowed by default in the debugger is now 1000
rather than 100.

=item *

L<DB_File> has been upgraded from version 1.827 to 1.828.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.49 to 2.51.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Install> has been upgraded from version 1.59 to 1.60.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> has been upgraded from version 6.66 to 6.68.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> has been upgraded from version 3.18 to 3.19.

=item *

L<File::Copy> has been upgraded from version 2.26 to 2.27.

=item *

L<File::DosGlob> has been upgraded from version 1.10 to 1.11.

=item *

L<File::Fetch> has been upgraded from version 0.38 to 0.42.

=item *

L<File::Find> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.40 to 3.41.

C<tmpdir> now respects changes to environment variables from which the
temporary directory is derived. [RT #88940]

=item *

L<File::Temp> has been upgraded from version 0.23 to 0.2301.

=item *

L<Filter::Simple> has been upgraded from version 0.89 to 0.90.

=item *

L<Filter::Util::Call> has been upgraded from version 1.45 to 1.49.

=item *

L<Getopt::Long> has been upgraded from version 2.39 to 2.4.

=item *

L<Hash::Util::FieldHash> has been upgraded from version 1.10 to 1.11.

=item *

L<HTTP::Tiny> has been upgraded from version 0.025 to 0.031.

=item *

L<IPC::Open3> has been upgraded from version 1.13 to 1.14.

=item *

L<Locale::Maketext> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.9991 to 1.9992.

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2604 to 0.2606.

=item *

L<Module::Build> has been upgraded from version 0.4003 to 0.4005.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 2.91 to 2.92.

Adds L<Module::CoreList::Utils> which provides information on which core and
dual-life utilities shipped with each version of L<perl>.

=item *

L<Module::Metadata> has been upgraded from version 1.000011 to 1.000014.

=item *

L<mro> has been upgraded from version 1.11 to 1.12.

=item *

L<Net::Ping> has been upgraded from version 2.41 to 2.42.

=item *

L<perlfaq> has been upgraded from version 5.0150042 to 5.0150043.

=item *

L<Pod::Html> has been upgraded from version 1.18 to 1.19.

=item *

L<Pod::Parser> has been upgraded from version 1.60 to 1.61.

=item *

L<Pod::Perldoc> has been upgraded from version 3.19 to 3.20.

=item *

L<Pod::Usage> has been upgraded from version 1.61 to 1.63.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 1.32 to 1.33.

=item *

L<re> has been upgraded from version 0.23 to 0.25.

=item *

L<Safe> has been upgraded from version 2.35 to 2.36.

=item *

L<Storable> has been upgraded from version 2.42 to 2.43.

=item *

L<Sys::Hostname> has been upgraded from version 1.17 to 1.18.

=item *

L<Sys::Syslog> has been upgraded from version 0.32 to 0.33.

=item *

L<Term::ReadLine> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

=item *

L<Test::Harness> has been upgraded from version 3.26 to 3.28

Memory usage is dramatically reduced. t/harness now uses about 10% of the
memory used by 3.26 and earlier.

C<PERL5LIB> is always propagated to a test's C<@INC>, even under C<-T>.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 1.86 to 1.87.

=item *

L<threads::shared> has been upgraded from version 1.43 to 1.44.

=item *

L<Tie::File> has been upgraded from version 0.99 to 1.00.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.20_01 to 1.2002.

=item *

L<Unicode::Collate> has been upgraded from version 0.97 to 0.98.

=item *

L<Unicode::UCD> has been upgraded from version 0.51 to 0.52.

A function, L<Unicode::UCD/search_invlist()> is now available to do
search an inversion list or map for a code point.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

=head3 L<perlfunc>

=over

=item *

C<goto EXPR> is now documented to handle an expression that evalutes to a
code reference as if it was C<goto &$coderef>.  This behavior is at least ten
years old.

=item *

C<eval EXPR> now has caveats about expanding floating point numbers in some
locales

=item *

Noted that C<chop> and C<chomp> can reset the hash iterator

=item *

Improved C<fileno> example

=back

=head3 L<perlexperiment>

=over

=item *

C<\s> matching C<\cK> is marked experimental

=item *

ithreads were accepted in 5.8.0

=item *

Long doubles are not experimental

=back

=head3 L<perllocale>

=over

=item *

Update to mention fc(), \F

=back

=head3 L<perltrap>

=over 4

=item *

There is now a L<JavaScript|perltrap/JavaScript Traps> section.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

L<A sequence of multiple spaces in a charnames alias definition is deprecated|perldiag/"A sequence of multiple spaces in a charnames alias definition is deprecated">

L<Trailing white-space in a charnames alias definition is deprecated|perldiag/"Trailing white-space in a charnames alias definition is deprecated">

These two deprecation warnings involving C<\N{...}> were incorrectly
implemented.  They did not warn by default (now they do) and could not be
made fatal via C<< use warnings FATAL => 'deprecated' >> (now they can).

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

=head3 F<bisect.pl> enhancements

The git bisection tool F<Porting/bisect.pl> has had many enhancements.

=over 4

=item *

Can optionally run the test case with a timeout.

=item *

Can now run in-place in a clean git checkout.

=item *

Can run the test case under C<valgrind>.

=item *

Can apply user supplied patches and fixes to the source checkout before
building.

=item *

Now has fixups to enable building several more historical ranges of bleadperl,
which can be useful for pinpointing the origins of bugs or behaviour changes.

=back

It is provided as part of the source distribution but not installed because
it is not self-contained as it relies on being run from within a git
checkout. Note also that it makes no attempt to fix tests, correct runtime
bugs or make something useful to install - its purpose is to make minimal
changes to get any historical revision of interest to build and run as close
as possible to "as-was", and thereby make C<git bisect> easy to use.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

=over 4

=item DG/UX

DG/UX was a Unix sold by Data General. The last release was in April 2001.
It only runs on Data General's own hardware.

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Mixed-endian platforms

The code supporting C<pack> and C<unpack> operations on mixed endian
platforms has been removed. We believe that Perl has long been unable to
build on mixed endian architectures (such as PDP-11s), so we don't think
that this change will affect any platforms which are able to build v5.18.0.

=item Windows

The BUILD_STATIC and ALL_STATIC makefile options for linking some or (nearly)
all extensions statically (into perl519.dll, and into a separate
perl-static.exe too) were broken for MinGW builds. This has now been fixed.

The ALL_STATIC option has also been improved to include the Encode and Win32
extensions (for both VC++ and MinGW builds).

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

Perl's new copy-on-write mechanism  (which is now enabled by default),
allows any C<SvPOK> scalar to be automatically upgraded to a copy-on-write
scalar when copied. A reference count on the string buffer is stored in
the string buffer itself.

For example:

    $ perl -MDevel::Peek -e'$a="abc"; $b = $a; Dump $a; Dump $b'
    SV = PV(0x260cd80) at 0x2620ad8
      REFCNT = 1
      FLAGS = (POK,IsCOW,pPOK)
      PV = 0x2619bc0 "abc"\0
      CUR = 3
      LEN = 16
      COW_REFCNT = 1
    SV = PV(0x260ce30) at 0x2620b20
      REFCNT = 1
      FLAGS = (POK,IsCOW,pPOK)
      PV = 0x2619bc0 "abc"\0
      CUR = 3
      LEN = 16
      COW_REFCNT = 1

Note that both scalars share the same PV buffer and have a COW_REFCNT
greater than zero.

This means that XS code which wishes to modify the C<SvPVX()> buffer of an
SV should call C<SvPV_force()> or similar first, to ensure a valid (and
unshared) buffer, and to call C<SvSETMAGIC()> afterwards. This in fact has
always been the case (for example hash keys were already copy-on-write);
this change just spreads the COW behaviour to a wider variety of SVs.

One important difference is that before 5.18.0, shared hash-key scalars
used to have the C<SvREADONLY> flag set; this is no longer the case.

This new behaviour can still be disabled by running F<Configure> with
B<-Accflags=-DPERL_NO_COW>.  This option will probably be removed in Perl
5.22.

=item *

C<PL_sawampersand> is now a constant.  The switch this variable provided
(to enable/disable the pre-match copy depending on whether C<$&> had been
seen) has been removed and replaced with copy-on-write, eliminating a few
bugs.

The previous behaviour can still be enabled by running F<Configure> with
B<-Accflags=-DPERL_SAWAMPERSAND>.

=item *

The functions C<my_swap>, C<my_htonl> and C<my_ntohl> have been removed.
It is unclear why these functions were ever marked as I<A>, part of the
API. XS code can't call them directly, as it can't rely on them being
compiled. Unsurprisingly, no code on CPAN references them.

=item *

The signature of the C<Perl_re_intuit_start()> regex function has changed;
the function pointer C<intuit> in the regex engine plugin structure
has also changed accordingly. A new parameter, C<strbeg> has been added;
this has the same meaning as the same-named parameter in
C<Perl_regexec_flags>. Previously intuit would try to guess the start of
the string from the passed SV (if any), and would sometimes get it wrong
(e.g. with an overloaded SV).

=item *

XS code may use various macros to change the case of a character or code
point (for example C<toLOWER_utf8()>).  Only a couple of these were
documented until now;
and now they should be used in preference to calling the underlying
functions.  See L<perlapi/Character case changing>.

=item *

The code dealt rather inconsistently with uids and gids. Some
places assumed that they could be safely stored in UVs, others
in IVs, others in ints. Four new macros are introduced:
SvUID(), sv_setuid(), SvGID(), and sv_setgid()

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

The OP allocation code now returns correctly aligned memory in all cases
for C<struct pmop>. Previously it could return memory only aligned to a
4-byte boundary, which is not correct for an ithreads build with 64 bit IVs
on some 32 bit platforms. Notably, this caused the build to fail completely
on sparc GNU/Linux. [RT #118055]

=item *

The debugger's C<man> command been fixed. It was broken in the v5.18.0
release. The C<man> command is aliased to the names C<doc> and C<perldoc> -
all now work again.

=item *

C<@_> is now correctly visible in the debugger, fixing a regression
introduced in v5.18.0's debugger. [RT #118169]

=item *

Evaluating large hashes in scalar context is now much faster, as the number
of used chains in the hash is now cached for larger hashes. Smaller hashes
continue not to store it and calculate it when needed, as this saves one IV.
That would be 1 IV overhead for every object built from a hash. [RT #114576]

=item *

Fixed a small number of regexp constructions that could either fail to
match or crash perl when the string being matched against was
allocated above the 2GB line on 32-bit systems. [RT #118175]

=item *

Perl v5.16 inadvertently introduced a bug whereby calls to XSUBs that were
not visible at compile time were treated as lvalues and could be assigned
to, even when the subroutine was not an lvalue sub.  This has been fixed.
[RT #117947]

=item *

In Perl v5.18.0 dualvars that had an empty string for the string part but a
non-zero number for the number part starting being treated as true.  In
previous versions they were treated as false, the string representation
taking precedeence.  The old behaviour has been restored. [RT #118159]

=item *

Since Perl v5.12, inlining of constants that override built-in keywords of
the same name had countermanded C<use subs>, causing subsequent mentions of
the constant to use the built-in keyword instead.  This has been fixed.

=item *

Lexical constants (C<my sub a() { 42 }>) no longer crash when inlined.

=item *

Parameter prototypes attached to lexical subroutines are now respected when
compiling sub calls without parentheses.  Previously, the prototypes were
honoured only for calls I<with> parentheses. [RT #116735]

=item *

Syntax errors in lexical subroutines in combination with calls to the same
subroutines no longer cause crashes at compile time.

=item *

The warning produced by C<-l $handle> now applies to IO refs and globs, not
just to glob refs.  That warning is also now UTF8-clean. [RT #117595]

=item *

Various memory leaks involving the parsing of the C<(?[...])> regular
expression construct have been fixed.

=item *

C<(?[...])> now allows interpolation of precompiled patterns consisting of
C<(?[...])> with bracketed character classes inside (C<$pat =
S<qr/(?[ [a] ])/;> S</(?[ $pat ])/>>).  Formerly, the brackets would
confuse the regular expression parser.

=item *

The "Quantifier unexpected on zero-length expression" warning message could
appear twice starting in Perl v5.10 for a regular expression also
containing alternations (e.g., "a|b") triggering the trie optimisation.

=item *

C<delete local $ENV{nonexistent_env_var}> no longer leaks memory.

=item *

C<sort> and C<require> followed by a keyword prefixed with C<CORE::> now
treat it as a keyword, and not as a subroutine or module name. [RT #24482]

=item *

Through certain conundrums, it is possible to cause the current package to
be freed.  Certain operators (C<bless>, C<reset>, C<open>, C<eval>) could
not cope and would crash.  They have been made more resilient. [RT #117941]

=item *

Aliasing filehandles through glob-to-glob assignment would not update
internal method caches properly if a package of the same name as the
filehandle existed, resulting in filehandle method calls going to the
package instead.  This has been fixed.

=item *

C<./Configure -de -Dusevendorprefix> didn't default [RT #64126]

=item *

The C<Statement unlikely to be reached> warning was listed in
L<perldiag> as an C<exec>-category warning, but was enabled and disabled
by the C<syntax> category.  On the other hand, the C<exec> category
controlled its fatal-ness.  It is now entirely handled by the C<exec>
category.

=item *

The "Replacement list is longer that search list" warning for C<tr///> and
C<y///> no longer occurs in the presence of the C</c> flag. [RT #118047]

=item *

Perl v5.18 inadvertently introduced a bug whereby interpolating mixed up-
and down-graded UTF-8 strings in a regex could result in malformed UTF-8
in the pattern: specifically if a downgraded character in the range
C<\x80..\xff> followed a UTF-8 string, e.g.

    utf8::upgrade(  my $u = "\x{e5}");
    utf8::downgrade(my $d = "\x{e5}");
    /$u$d/

[RT #118297]

=item *

Stringification of NVs are not cached so that the lexical locale controls
stringification of the decimal point [perl #108378] [perl #115800]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.19.1 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.19.0
and contains approximately 26,000 lines of changes across 680 files from 37
authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.19.1:

Alexandr Ciornii, Brian Fraser, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry,
Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Daniel Dragan, David Golden, David Mitchell, David
Steinbrunner, Dominic Hargreaves, Eric Brine, Father Chrysostomos, H.Merijn
Brand, Heiko Eissfeldt, James E Keenan, Jerry D. Hedden, Kang-min Liu, Karl
Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Lukas Mai, Marcel Grünauer, Mark Jason Dominus,
Max Maischein, Mike Doherty, Nicholas Clark, Paul Green, Peter Martini, Petr
Písař, Ricardo Signes, Shirakata Kentaro, Shlomi Fish, Steffen Müller, Steve
Hay, Sullivan Beck, Tony Cook, Yves Orton, Zsbán Ambrus.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
