=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5334delta - what is new for perl v5.33.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.33.3 release and the 5.33.4
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.33.2, first read
L<perl5333delta>, which describes differences between 5.33.2 and 5.33.3.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.81 to 1.82.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> has been upgraded from version 0.280234 to 0.280235.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> has been upgraded from version 7.48 to 7.56.

=item *

L<File::Fetch> has been upgraded from version 0.56 to 1.00.

=item *

L<File::Path> has been upgraded from version 2.17 to 2.18.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.78 to 3.79.

=item *

L<IPC::SysV> has been upgraded from version 2.08 to 2.09.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20201020 to 5.20201120.

=item *

L<Net::Ping> has been upgraded from version 2.73_01 to 2.74.

=item *

L<perlfaq> has been upgraded from version 5.20200523 to 5.20201107.

=item *

L<Pod::Html> has been upgraded from version 1.25 to 1.26.

=item *

L<Pod::Simple> has been upgraded from version 3.41 to 3.42.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302182 to 1.302183.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

=head3 L<perlfaq>

=over 4

=item *

The Perl FAQ was updated to CPAN version 5.20201107 with minor
improvements.

=back

=head3 L<perlapi>

=over 4

=item *

Efforts continue in improving the presentation of this document, and to
document more API elements.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

L<\K not permitted in lookahead/lookbehind in regex; marked by <-- HERE in mE<sol>%sE<sol>|perldiag/"\K not permitted in lookahead/lookbehind in regex; marked by <-- HERE in m/%s/">

This error was incorrectly produced in some cases involving nested
lookarounds.  This has been fixed. [L<GH #18123|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18123>]

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item DragonFlyBSD

Tests were updated to workaround DragonFlyBSD bugs in L<tc*()
functions|https://bugs.dragonflybsd.org/issues/3252> and L<ctime
updates|https://bugs.dragonflybsd.org/issues/3251>.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Magic is now called correctly for stacked file test operators.  [L<GH #18293|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18293>]

=item *

The C<@ary = split(...)> optimization no longer switches in the target
array as the value stack. [L<GH #18232|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18232>] Also see discussion at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/pull/18014#issuecomment-671299506>.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.33.4 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.33.3 and contains approximately 6,900 lines of changes across 340 files
from 16 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 4,200 lines of changes to 260 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.33.4:

Ben Cornett, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dan Book, David Mitchell, Giovanni
Tataranni, James E Keenan, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Marcus
Holland-Moritz, Nicolas R., Richard Leach, Scott Baker, Steve Hay, TAKAI
Kousuke, Tom Hukins, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
