=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

[ this is a template for a new perldelta file.  Any text flagged as XXX needs
to be processed before release. ]

perl5250delta - what is new for perl v5.25.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.24.0 release and the 5.25.0
release.

=head1 Known Problems

=over 4

=item *

Some modules have been broken by the L<context stack rework|/Internal Changes>.
These modules were relying on non-guaranteed implementation details in perl.
Their maintainers have been informed, and should contact perl5-porters for
advice if needed.  Below is a subset of these modules:

=over 4

=item L<Algorithm::Permute>

=item L<Coro>

L<Coro> and perl v5.22.0 were already incompatible due to a change in the perl,
and the reworking on the perl context stack creates a further incompatibility.
perl5-porters has L<discussed the issue on the mailing
list|http://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.perl5.porters/2016/05/msg236174.html>.

=item L<Data::Alias>

=item L<RPerl>

=item L<Scope::Upper>

=item L<TryCatch>

=back

=item *

The module L<lexical::underscore> no longer works on perl v5.24.0, because perl
no longer has a lexical C<$_>!

=item *

C<mod_perl> has been patched for compatibility for v5.22.0 and later but no
release has been made.  The relevant patch (and other changes) can be found in
their source code repository, L<mirrored at
GitHub|https://github.com/apache/mod_perl/commit/82827132efd3c2e25cc413c85af61bb63375da6e>.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

XXX Generate this with:

  perl Porting/acknowledgements.pl v5.24.0..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
