=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5273delta - what is new for perl v5.27.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.27.2 release and the 5.27.3
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.27.1, first read
L<perl5272delta>, which describes differences between 5.27.1 and 5.27.2.

=head1 Deprecations

=head2 Module removals

The following modules will be removed from the core distribution in a
future release, and will at that time need to be installed from CPAN.
Distributions on CPAN which require these modules will need to list them as
prerequisites.

The core versions of these modules will now issue C<"deprecated">-category
warnings to alert you to this fact.  To silence these deprecation warnings,
install the modules in question from CPAN.

Note that these are (with rare exceptions) fine modules that you are encouraged
to continue to use.  Their disinclusion from core primarily hinges on their
necessity to bootstrapping a fully functional, CPAN-capable Perl installation,
not usually on concerns over their design.

=over

=item B::Debug

=back

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

C<SvTRUE()> is now more efficient.

=item *

C<keys()> in void and scalar contexts is now more efficient.

=item *

Various integer-returning ops are now more efficient in scalar/boolean context.

=item *

C<< if (index(...) != -1) { ... } >> is now more efficient.

=item *

C<for()> loops and similar constructs are now more efficient in most cases.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.68 to 1.69.

=item *

L<B::Concise> has been upgraded from version 1.000 to 1.001.

=item *

L<B::Debug> has been upgraded from version 1.24 to 1.25.
NOTE: L<B::Debug> is deprecated and may be removed from a future version of Perl.

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42.

=item *

L<base> has been upgraded from version 2.25 to 2.26.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.167 to 2.167_02.

=item *

L<Devel::Peek> has been upgraded from version 1.26 to 1.27.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Constant> has been upgraded from version 0.23 to 0.24.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> has been upgraded from version 3.34 to 3.35.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Typemaps> has been upgraded from version 3.34 to 3.35.

=item *

L<Filter::Simple> has been upgraded from version 0.93 to 0.94.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20170720 to 5.20170821.

=item *

L<SelfLoader> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

=item *

L<Storable> has been upgraded from version 2.63 to 2.64.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.16 to 2.17.

=item *

L<utf8> has been upgraded from version 1.19 to 1.20.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

On GCC, C<-Werror=pointer-arith> is now enabled by default,
disallowing arithmetic on void and function pointers.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Fixed a duplicate symbol failure with C<-flto -mieee-fp> builds.
F<pp.c> defined C<_LIB_VERSION> which C<-lieee> already defines. [perl
#131786]

=item *

The tokenizer no longer consumes the exponent part of a floating
point number if it's incomplete. [perl #131725]

=item *

On non-threaded builds, for C<m/$null/> where C<$null> is an empty
string is no longer treated as if the C</o> flag was present when the
previous matching match operator included the C</o> flag.  The
rewriting used to implement this behavior could confuse the
interpreter.  This matches the behaviour of threaded builds.  [perl
#124368]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.27.3 represents approximately 5 weeks of development since Perl 5.27.2
and contains approximately 5,600 lines of changes across 150 files from 19
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 4,000 lines of changes to 84 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.27.3:

Aaron Crane, Aristotle Pagaltzis, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry,
Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, Daniel Dragan, David Mitchell, Father Chrysostomos,
James E Keenan, Karl Williamson, Ken Brown, Lukas Mai, Matthew Horsfall,
Nicholas Clark, Robin Barker, Steffen Müller, Steve Hay, Tony Cook, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
