=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5333delta - what is new for perl v5.33.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.33.2 release and the 5.33.3
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.33.1, first read
L<perl5332delta>, which describes differences between 5.33.1 and 5.33.2.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<bytes> has been upgraded from version 1.07 to 1.08.

=item *

L<CPAN> has been upgraded from version 2.27 to 2.28.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.175 to 2.176.

=item *

L<DB> has been upgraded from version 1.58 to 1.59.

=item *

L<DB_File> has been upgraded from version 1.854 to 1.855.

=item *

L<Devel::Peek> has been upgraded from version 1.29 to 1.30.

=item *

L<Devel::PPPort> has been upgraded from version 3.60 to 3.62.

=item *

L<Digest> has been upgraded from version 1.17_01 to 1.19.

=item *

L<Digest::MD5> has been upgraded from version 2.55_01 to 2.58.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 3.06 to 3.07.

=item *

L<Errno> has been upgraded from version 1.32 to 1.33.

=item *

L<experimental> has been upgraded from version 0.020 to 0.022.

=item *

L<Exporter> has been upgraded from version 5.75 to 5.76.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker> has been upgraded from version 7.44 to 7.48.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::PL2Bat> has been upgraded from version 0.002 to 0.003.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.60 to 1.61.

=item *

L<File::Temp> has been upgraded from version 0.2309 to 0.2311.

=item *

L<FindBin> has been upgraded from version 1.51 to 1.52.

=item *

L<Getopt::Long> has been upgraded from version 2.51 to 2.52.

=item *

L<Getopt::Std> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

=item *

L<I18N::LangTags> has been upgraded from version 0.44 to 0.45.

=item *

L<if> has been upgraded from version 0.0608 to 0.0609.

=item *

L<locale> has been upgraded from version 1.09 to 1.10.

=item *

L<MIME::Base64> has been upgraded from version 3.15 to 3.16.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20200920 to 5.20201020.

=item *

L<Module::Load> has been upgraded from version 0.34 to 0.36.

=item *

L<mro> has been upgraded from version 1.24 to 1.25.

=item *

L<overload> has been upgraded from version 1.32 to 1.33.

=item *

L<Pod::Checker> has been upgraded from version 1.73 to 1.74.

=item *

L<Pod::Simple> has been upgraded from version 3.40 to 3.41.

=item *

L<Pod::Usage> has been upgraded from version 1.70 to 2.01.

=item *

L<re> has been upgraded from version 0.40 to 0.41.

(See under L</Internal Changes> for more information.)

=item *

L<Storable> has been upgraded from version 3.22 to 3.23.

=item *

L<subs> has been upgraded from version 1.03 to 1.04.

=item *

L<Symbol> has been upgraded from version 1.08 to 1.09.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302181 to 1.302182.

=item *

L<Tie::RefHash> has been upgraded from version 1.39 to 1.40.

=item *

L<Time::Local> has been upgraded from version 1.28 to 1.30.

=item *

L<Unicode::Collate> has been upgraded from version 1.27 to 1.29.

=item *

L<utf8> has been upgraded from version 1.22 to 1.24.

=item *

L<version> has been upgraded from version 0.9924 to 0.9928.

=item *

L<Win32> has been upgraded from version 0.53 to 0.54.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.11 to 1.12.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes listed in
this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

Added the F<Configure> option B<-Dusedefaultstrict> to enable strict by default
in perl programs when not invoked with B<-e> or B<-E>.  This is a diagnostic
tool for development.

=item *

We now trap SIGBUS when F<Configure> checks for C<va_copy>.

On several systems the attempt to determine if we need C<va_copy> or similar
results in a SIGBUS instead of the expected SIGSEGV, which previously caused a
core dump.

[L<GH #18148|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18148>]

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes in this
release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

The same manifest is now used for Visual C++ and gcc builds.

Previously, MSVC builds were using the B</manifestdependency> flag instead of
embedding F<perlexe.manifest>, which caused issues such as C<GetVersionEx()>
returning the wrong version number on Windows 10.

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

The L<re> module has a new function C<optimization>, which can return a hashref
of optimization data discovered about a compiled regexp.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Fixed a bug in which some regexps with recursive subpatterns matched
incorrectly.

[L<GH #18096|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18096>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.33.3 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.33.2
and contains approximately 90,000 lines of changes across 740 files from 20
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 15,000 lines of changes to 500 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers.  The following people are known to have contributed
the improvements that became Perl 5.33.3:

Christian Walde (Mithaldu), Dan Book, Eric Lindblad, Felipe Gasper, H.Merijn
Brand, Hugo van der Sanden, Ichinose Shogo, James E Keenan, Karen Etheridge,
Karl Williamson, Nicolas R., Richard Leach, Samanta Navarro, Sawyer X, Steve
Hay, TAKAI Kousuke, Thibault Duponchelle, Todd Rinaldo, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony
Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history.  In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core.  We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION> for details of how to
report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5, you
can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
