=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5230delta - what is new for perl v5.23.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.22.0 release and the 5.23.0
release.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 Unicode 8.0 is now supported

For details on what is in this release, see
L<http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode8.0.0/>.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

=head2 The C</\C/> character class has been removed.

This regular expression character class was deprecated in v5.20.0 and has
produced a deprecation warning since v5.22.0. It is now a compile-time
error. If you need to examine the individual bytes that make up a
UTF8-encoded character, then use C<utf8::encode()> on the string (or a
copy) first.

=head2 C<chdir('')> no longer chdirs home

Using C<chdir('')> or C<chdir(undef)> to chdir home has been deprecated since
perl v5.8, and will now fail.  Use C<chdir()> instead.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

The libnet distribution has been upgraded from version 3.05 to 3.06.

=item *

The Scalar-List-Utils distribution has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42.

=item *

L<autodie> has been upgraded from version 2.26 to 2.27.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta> has been upgraded from version 2.150001 to 2.150005.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta::Requirements> has been upgraded from version 2.132 to 2.133.

=item *

L<CPAN::Meta::YAML> has been upgraded from version 0.012 to 0.016.

=item *

L<Encode> has been upgraded from version 2.72 to 2.73.

=item *

L<encoding> has been upgraded from version 2.14 to 2.15.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> has been upgraded from version 0.280221 to 0.280223.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.40 to 1.41.

=item *

L<Getopt::Long> has been upgraded from version 2.45 to 2.46.

=item *

L<HTTP::Tiny> has been upgraded from version 0.054 to 0.056.

=item *

L<List::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42_01.

=item *

L<Locale::Codes> has been upgraded from version 3.34 to 3.35.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.9997 to 1.999701.

Correct the behaviour of bdiv() and bmod() in list context. [perl #124300]

Correct C<< Math::BigInt->new() >> for non-integer input.  [perl #124325]

Speed up Math::BigFloat -> blog(). [perl #124382]

Fix bug in Math::BigFloat's bceil() and bint() methods. [perl #124412]

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2608 to 0.260801.

Correct the behaviour of bdiv() and bmod() in list context. [perl #124303]

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20150520 to 5.20150620.

=item *

L<Module::Metadata> has been upgraded from version 1.000026 to 1.000027.

=item *

L<parent> has been upgraded from version 0.232 to 0.234.

=item *

L<Parse::CPAN::Meta> has been upgraded from version 1.4414 to 1.4417.

=item *

L<perl5db.pl> has been upgraded from version 1.49 to 1.49_01.

User actions are no longer evaluated after the script under the
debugger finishes.  [perl #71678]

=item *

L<Pod::Simple> has been upgraded from version 3.29 to 3.30.

=item *

L<Pod::Usage> has been upgraded from version 1.64 to 1.67.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 1.53 to 1.54.

The NaN payload API has been implemented (getpayload, setpayload,
setpayloadsig, issignaling).

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.41 to 1.42_01.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.018 to 2.019.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.01 to 2.02.

=item *

L<Time::Piece> has been upgraded from version 1.29 to 1.30.

=item *

L<UNIVERSAL> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

Don't import from L<UNIVERSAL> in its documentation, it no longer
exports anything.  [perl #125410]

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Win32

=over

=item *

Visual C++ 2013 builds will now execute on XP and higher. Previously they would
only execute on Vista and higher.

=item *

You can now build perl with GNU Make and GCC.  [perl #123440]

=item *

C<truncate($filename, $size)> now works for files over 4GB in size.
[perl #125347]

=back

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Duplicating a closed file handle for write no longer creates a
filename of the form F<GLOB(0xXXXXXXXX)>.  [perl #125115]

=item *

Warning fatality is now ignored when rewinding the stack.  This
prevents infinite recursion when the now fatal error also causes
rewinding of the stack.  [perl #123398]

=item * 

In perl v5.22.0, the logic changed when parsing a numeric parameter to the -C
option, such that the successfully parsed number was not saved as the option
value if it parsed to the end of the argument.  [perl #125381]

=item *

The PadlistNAMES macro is an lvalue again.

=item *

Zero -DPERL_TRACE_OPS memory for sub-threads.

perl_clone_using() was missing Zero init of PL_op_exec_cnt[].  This
caused sub-threads in threaded -DPERL_TRACE_OPS builds to spew exceedingly
large op-counts at destruct.  These counts would print %x as "ABABABAB",
clearly a mem-poison value.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.23.0 represents approximately 3 weeks of development since Perl 5.22.0
and contains approximately 86,000 lines of changes across 480 files from 29
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 55,000 lines of changes to 270 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.23.0:

Chase Whitener, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn Ilmari
Mannsåker, Daniel Dragan, David Golden, David Mitchell, Hugo van der Sanden,
Jan Dubois, Jarkko Hietaniemi, Jerry D. Hedden, Jim Cromie, Karen Etheridge,
Karl Williamson, kmx, Lukas Mai, Martijn Lievaart, Matthew Horsfall, Niko Tyni,
Peter John Acklam, Rafael Garcia-Suarez, Reini Urban, Ricardo Signes, Shlomi
Fish, Steve Hay, Thomas Sibley, Tony Cook, Unicode Consortium, Zefram.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
https://rt.perl.org/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
