=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5371delta - what is new for perl v5.37.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.37.0 release and the 5.37.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.36.0, first read
L<perl5370delta>, which describes differences between 5.36.0 and 5.37.0.

=head1 Deprecations

=over 4

=item *

Removed many deprecated C functions. These have been deprecated for a long
time. See L<https://github.com/perl/perl5/commit/7008caa915ad99e650acf2aea40612b5e48b7ba2>
for a full list.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B> has been upgraded from version 1.83 to 1.84.

=item *

L<Carp> has been upgraded from version 1.52 to 1.53.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.184 to 2.185.

=item *

L<encoding::warnings> has been upgraded from version 0.13 to 0.14.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::CBuilder> has been upgraded from version 0.280236 to 0.280237.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Miniperl> has been upgraded from version 1.11 to 1.12.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.73 to 1.74.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.84 to 3.85.

=item *

L<FileHandle> has been upgraded from version 2.03 to 2.04.

=item *

L<GDBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.23 to 1.24.

The mmapsize() method now correctly fetches the value.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20220527 to 5.20220620.

=item *

L<ODBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.17 to 1.18.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.57 to 1.58.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 2.03 to 2.04.

=item *

L<SDBM_File> has been upgraded from 1.15 to 1.16.

SDBM_File now supports files over 2GB on Win32.  [github #6841]

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.27 to 2.28.

=item *

L<Unicode::Normalize> has been upgraded from version 1.31 to 1.32.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.22 to 1.23.

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, open an issue
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlapi>

=over 4

=item *

Documented L<C<hv_ksplit>|perlapi/hv_ksplit>

=item *

Documented L<C<hv_name_set>|perlapi/hv_name_set>

=item *

L<C<hv_store>|perlapi/hv_store> and L<C<hv_stores>|perlapi/hv_stores>
documentation have been greatly improved.

=item *

Documented L<C<gv_autoload_pv>|perlapi/gv_autoload_pv>

=item *

Documented L<C<gv_autoload_pvn>|perlapi/gv_autoload_pvn>

=item *

Documented L<C<gv_autoload_sv>|perlapi/gv_autoload_sv>

=item *

Documented L<C<gv_name_set>|perlapi/gv_name_set>

=item *

Documented L<C<start_subparse>|perlapi/start_subparse>

=item *

Documented L<C<SV_CHECK_THINKFIRST_COW_DROP>|perlapi/SV_CHECK_THINKFIRST_COW_DROP>

=item *

Documented L<C<SV_CHECK_THINKFIRST>|perlapi/SV_CHECK_THINKFIRST>

=item *

Documented L<C<SvPV_shrink_to_cur>|perlapi/SvPV_shrink_to_cur>

=item *

Documented L<C<save_aelem>|perlapi/save_aelem>

=item *

Documented L<C<save_aelem_flags>|perlapi/save_aelem_flags>

=item *

Documented L<C<save_helem>|perlapi/save_helem>

=item *

Documented L<C<save_helem_flags>|perlapi/save_helem_flags>

=back

=head3 L<perlintern>

=over 4

=item *

Documented L<C<save_pushptr>|perlintern/save_pushptr>

=item *

Documented L<C<save_scalar_at>|perlintern/save_scalar_at>

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

=head2 New Diagnostics

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

A new syntax error has been added for the error that a C<catch> block does
not have its required variable declaration. See
L<catch block requires a (VAR)|perldiag/"catch block requires a (VAR)">

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

L<Unknown locale category %d|perldiag/"Unknown locale category %d">

This is a shortened form of an already existing diagnostic, for use when
there is no new locale being switched to.  The previous diagnostic was
misleading in such circumstances.

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

Removed C<< Complex regular subexpression recursion limit (%d) exceeded >>

The regular expresion engine has not used recursion in some time. This
warning no longer makes sense.

See [L<GH #19636|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/pull/19636>].

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

C<make -j6 minitest> could fail due to a build conflict in building
C<$(MINIPERL_EXE)> between the main make process and a child process.
[github #19829]

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and
changes in this release.  Furthermore, these significant changes were
made:

=over 4

=item *

Unicode normalization tests have been added.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

=over 4

=item Ultrix

Support code for DEC Ultrix has been removed.  Ultrix was the native
Unix-like operating system for various Digital Equipment Corporation
machines.  Its final release was in 1995.

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

utimes() on Win32 would print a message to stderr if it failed to
convert a supplied C<time_t> to to a C<FILETIME>. [github #19668]

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

C<get_op_descs>, C<get_op_names>, C<get_opargs>, C<get_no_modify> and
C<get_ppaddr> have been marked deprecated.

=item *

C<hv_free_ent> has been marked as internal API.

=item *

C<save_pushptr>, C<save_pushptrptr>, and C<save_pushi32ptr> have been marked
as internal API.

=item *

New bool related functions and macros have been added to complement the new
bool type introduced in 5.36:

The functions are:

=over 4

=item L<C<newSVbool(const bool bool_val)>|perlapi/newSVbool>

=item L<C<newSV_true()>|perlapi/newSV_true>

=item L<C<newSV_false()>|perlapi/newSV_false>

=item L<C<sv_set_true(SV *sv)>|perlapi/sv_set_true>

=item L<C<sv_set_false(SV *sv)>|perlapi/sv_set_false>

=item L<C<sv_set_bool(SV *sv, const bool bool_val)>|perlapi/sv_set_bool>

=back

The macros are:

=over 4

=item L<C<SvIandPOK(sv)>|perlapi/SvIandPOK>

=item L<C<SvIandPOK_off(sv)>|perlapi/SvIandPOK_off>

=item L<C<SvIandPOK_on>|perlapi/SvIandPOK_on>

=back

=item *

Perl is no longer manipulating the C<environ> array directly. The variable
C<PL_use_safe_putenv> has been removed and C<PERL_USE_SAFE_PUTENV> is always
defined. This means XS modules can now call C<setenv> and C<putenv> without
causing segfaults. [L<perl #19399|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19399>]

=item *

Internal C API functions are now hidden with C<__attribute__((hidden))> on the
platforms that support it. This means they are no longer callable from XS
modules on those platforms.

It should be noted that those functions have always been hidden on Windows. This
change merely brings that to the other platforms.
[L<perl #19655|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/pull/19655>]

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Avoid recursion and stack overflow parsing 'pack' template

[L<GH #16319|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/16319>]

=item *

An eval() as the last statement in a regex code block could trigger an
interpreter panic; e.g.

    /(?{ ...; eval {....}; })/

[L<GH #19680|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19680>]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.37.1 represents approximately 3 weeks of development since Perl
5.37.0 and contains approximately 75,000 lines of changes across 240 files
from 28 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 30,000 lines of changes to 150 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.37.1:

Brian Greenfield, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Clemens Wasser, Dan Book, David
Mitchell, Ed Sabol, Elvin Aslanov, Graham Knop, Hugo van der Sanden, James E
Keenan, jkahrman, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans, Mark Jason Dominus,
Matthew Horsfall, Mohammad S Anwar, Neil Bowers, Nicholas Clark, Nicolas
Mendoza, Nicolas R, Paul Evans, Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Sidney
Markowitz, Sisyphus, Tomasz Konojacki, Tony Cook, Yves Orton.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
