=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5190delta - what is new for perl v5.19.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.18.0 release and the 5.19.0
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.17.0, first read
L<perl5180delta>, which describes differences between 5.17.0 and 5.18.0.

=head1 Notice

In v5.18.0, quite a few modules were marked for removal.  They have now been
removed.  See L<Removed Modules and Pragmata>, below.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Getopt::Std> has been upgraded from version 1.07 to 1.08.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 2.90 to 2.91.

=item *

L<Storable> has been upgraded from version 2.41 to 2.42.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.32 to 1.33.

=item *

L<utf8> has been upgraded from version 1.10 to 1.11.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

The distributions below have been removed from the core, but are still
available on the CPAN.  In many cases, the named distribution includes
multiple modules, which are not listed individually.  For a
comprehensive list of removals, consult:

  $ corelist --dif 5.18.0 5.19.0 | grep absent

=over

=item Archive-Extract

=item B-Lint

=item CPANPLUS

=item File-CheckTree

=item Log-Message

=item Module-Pluggable

=item Object-Accessor

=item Pod-LaTeX

=item Term-UI

=item Text-Soundex

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.19.0 represents approximately 0.2857142857 weeks of development
since Perl 5.18.0 and contains approximately 52,000 lines of changes
across 310 files from 6 authors.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to
have contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.19.0:

Brian Fraser, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Karl Williamson, Nicholas Clark,
Reuben Thomas, Ricardo Signes.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not
include the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who
reported issues to the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version are the removal of modules
no longer shipped with Perl's core.  We thank those modules for their
service and wish them luck in their future endeavors.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors,
please see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
