=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5351delta - what is new for perl v5.35.1

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.35.0 release and the 5.35.1
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.34.0, first read
L<perl5350delta>, which describes differences between 5.34.0 and 5.35.0.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<B::Deparse> has been upgraded from version 1.56 to 1.57.

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.179 to 2.181.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.65 to 1.66.

=item *

L<File::Copy> has been upgraded from version 2.35 to 2.36.

Inode numbers are now compared as strings, so that large inode numbers
are correctly distinguished. (GH #18788)

=item *

L<File::Glob> has been upgraded from version 1.33 to 1.35.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.80 to 3.81.

=item *

L<File::stat> has been upgraded from version 1.09 to 1.10.

=item *

L<IO> has been upgraded from version 1.46 to 1.47.

Implement sync() for win32.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20210521 to 5.20210620.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.50 to 1.51.

=item *

L<open> has been upgraded from version 1.12 to 1.13.

=item *

L<PathTools|Cwd> has been upgraded from version 3.80 to 3.81.

Inodes numbers are now compared as strings, so that large inode numbers
are correctly distinguished. (GH #18788)

=item *

L<perlfaq> has been upgraded from version 5.20210411 to 5.20210520.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 1.97 to 1.98.

=item *

L<Scalar::Util> has been upgraded from version 1.55 to 1.56.

=item *

L<Socket> has been upgraded from version 2.031 to 2.032.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302183 to 1.302185.

=item *

L<Unicode::Collate> has been upgraded from version 1.29 to 1.30.

One warning in F<mkheader> averted (rt.cpan.org #133952).

=item *

L<Unicode::UCD> has been upgraded from version 0.75 to 0.76.

=item *

L<version> has been upgraded from version 0.9928 to 0.9929.

=item *

L<XS::APItest> has been upgraded from version 1.16 to 1.17.

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

L<Can't modify %s in %s|perldiag/"Can't modify %s in %s">
(for scalar assignment to C<undef>)

Attempting to perform a scalar assignment to C<undef>, for example via
C<undef = $foo;>, previously triggered a fatal runtime error with the
message "L<Modification of a read-only value attempted|perldiag/"Modification of a read-only value attempted">."
It is more helpful to detect such attempted assignments prior to
runtime, so they are now compile time errors, resulting in the message
"Can't modify undef operator in scalar assignment".

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

Since the removal of PERL_OBJECT in Perl 5.8, PERL_IMPLICIT_CONTEXT and
MULTIPLICITY have been synonymous and they were being used interchangeably.
To simplify the code, all instances of PERL_IMPLICIT_CONTEXT have been
replaced with MULTIPLICITY.

PERL_IMPLICIT_CONTEXT will remain defined for compatibility with XS modules.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

utime() now correctly sets errno/C<$!> when called on a closed handle.

=item *

B::Deparse now correctly handles try/catch blocks with more complex scopes.
[L<GH #18874|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/18874>]

=back

=head1 Obituary

Raun "Spider" Boardman (SPIDB on CPAN), author of at least 66 commits to the
Perl 5 core distribution between 1996 and 2002, passed away May 24 2021 from
complications of COVID.  He will be missed.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.35.1 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.35.0 and contains approximately 57,000 lines of changes across 410 files
from 28 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 53,000 lines of changes to 220 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.35.1:

Alyssa Ross, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dan Book, Dan Jacobson, Dave Cross,
Dave Lambley, E. Choroba, Felipe Gasper, H.Merijn Brand, Hugo van der
Sanden, James E Keenan, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Leon Timmermans,
Matthew Horsfall, Max Maischein, Michael G Schwern, Nicholas Clark, Paul
Evans, Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Scott Baker, Thibault Duponchelle,
Todd Rinaldo, Tomasz Konojacki, Tomoyuki Sadahiro, Tony Cook, Михаил
Козачков.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
