?? Detached threads aren't supported on Windows yet, as they may lead to 
memory access violation problems.

=head1 NAME

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.8.4

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.8.3 release and
the 5.8.4 release.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

Many minor bugs have been fixed. Scripts which happen to rely on previously
erroneous behaviour will consider these fixes as incompatible changes :-)
You are advised to perform sufficient acceptance testing on this release
to satisfy yourself that this does not affect you, before putting this
release into production.

The diagnostic output of Carp has been changed slightly, to add a space after
the comma between arguments. This makes it much easier for tools such as
web browsers to wrap it, but might confuse any automatic tools which perform
detailed parsing of Carp output.

The internal dump output has been improved, so that non-printable characters
such as newline and backspace are output in C<\x> notation, rather than
octal. This might just confuse non-robust tools which parse the output of
modules such as Devel::Peek.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 Malloc wrapping

Perl can now be built to detect attempts at pathologically large assignments.
Previously such assignments would suffer from integer wrap-around during size
calculations causing a misallocation, which would crash perl, and could
theoretically be used for "stack smashing" attacks. The wrapping defaults to
enabled on platforms where we know it works (AIX, BSDi, Darwin, DEC OSF,
FreeBSD, HP/UX, GNU Linux, OpenBSD, Solaris, VMS and Win32) and defaults to
disabled on other platforms.

=head2 Unicode Character Database 4.0.1

The copy of the Unicode Character Database included in Perl 5.8 has
been updated to 4.0.1 from 4.0.0.

=head2 suidperl less insecure

Paul Szabo has analysed and patched C<suidperl> to remove existing known
insecurities. Currently there are no known holes in C<suidperl>, but
previous experience shows that we cannot be confident that these were the
last. For new projects the core perl team would strongly recommend that you
use dedicated, single purpose security tools such as C<sudo> in preference
to C<suidperl>.

=head2 format

In addition to bug fixes, C<format>'s features have been enhanced. See XXX

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

The (mis)use of C</tmp> in core modules and documentation has been tidied up.
Not all modules with dual lives on CPAN have had these changes applied yet.

=over 4

=item Attribute::Handlers

=item B

=item Benchmark

=item CGI

=item Carp

=item Cwd

=item Exporter

=item File::Find

=item IO

=item IPC::Open3

=item Local::Maketext

=item Math::BigFloat

=item Math::BigInt

=item Math::BigRat

=item MIME::Base64

=item ODBM_File

=item POSIX

=item Shell

=item Socket

There is experimental support for Linux abstract Unix domain sockets.

=item Storable

=item Switch

Synced with the CPAN 2.10 release

=item Sys::Syslog

C<syslog()> can now use numeric constants for facility names and priorities,
in addition to strings.

=item Term::ANSIColor

=item Term::Unicode

=item Time::HiRes

=item Unicode::UCD

=item Win32

Win32.pm/Win32.xs has moved from the libwin32 module to core Perl

=item base

=item open

=item threads

XXX Win32 detached threads?

=item utf8

=back

=head1 Performance Enhancements

=over 4

=item *

Accelerated Unicode case mappings (C</i>, C<lc>, C<uc>, etc).

=item *

In place sort optimised (eg C<@a = sort @a>)

=item *

Unnecessary assignment optimised away in

  my $s = undef;
  my @a = ();
  my %h = ();

=item *

Optimised C<map> in scalar context

=back

=head1 Installation and Configuration Improvements

The build process on both VMS and Windows has had several minor improvements
made. Perl should now build on Windows 95. C<perl.exe> on Windows now has a
"Camel" logo icon. The use of a camel with Perl is a trademark of O'Reilly
and Associates, and is used in the Perl core distribution with their
permission. On Windows Borland's C compiler can now compile perl with PerlIO
and/or USE_LARGE_FILES enabled.

Perl should build cleanly on Stratus VOS once more.

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

More utf8 bugs fixed, notably in how C<chomp>, C<chop>, C<send>, and
C<syswrite> and interact with utf8 data. Concatenation now works correctly
when C<use bytes;> is in scope.

The "const in void context" warning has been suppressed for a constant in an
optimised-away boolean expression such as C<5 || print;>

C<perl -i> could C<fchmod(stdin)> by mistake. This is serious if stdin is
attached to a terminal, and perl is running as root. Now fixed.

=head1 New or Changed Diagnostics

C<Carp> and the internal diagnostic routines used by C<Devel::Peek> have been
made clearer, as described in L</Incompatible Changes>

=head1 Changed Internals

Some bugs have been fixed in the hash internals. Restricted hashes and
their place holders are now allocated and deleted at slightly different times,
but this should not be visible to user code.

=head1 Future Directions

Code freeze for the next maintenance release (5.8.5) is will be on 30th
June 2004, with release by mid July.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles
recently posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl
bug database at http://bugs.perl.org.  There may also be
information at http://www.perl.org, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the B<perlbug>
program included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down
to a tiny but sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the
output of C<perl -V>, will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be
analysed by the Perl porting team.  You can browse and search
the Perl 5 bugs at http://bugs.perl.org/

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for exhaustive details on what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
