=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5293delta - what is new for perl v5.29.3

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.29.2 release and the 5.29.3
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.29.1, first read
L<perl5292delta>, which describes differences between 5.29.1 and 5.29.2.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Archive::Tar> has been upgraded from version 2.30 to 2.32

=item *

L<Carp> has been upgraded from version 1.38 to 1.50

=item *

L<Data::Dumper> has been upgraded from version 2.171 to 2.172

=item *

L<Devel::PPPort> has been upgraded from version 3.42 to 3.43.

=item *

L<File::Path> has been upgraded from version 2.15 to 2.16.

=item *

PathTools has been upgraded from version 3.74 to 3.75

=item *

L<perlfaq> has been upgraded from version 5.20180605 to 5.20180915.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

C<Locale::Codes> has been removed at the request of its author.  It
continues to be available on CPAN C<L<Locale::Codes>>.  [perl #133458].

=back

=head1 Documentation

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

We have attempted to update the documentation to reflect the changes
listed in this document.  If you find any we have missed, send email
to L<perlbug@perl.org|mailto:perlbug@perl.org>.

Additionally, the following selected changes have been made:

=head3 L<perlreapi>, L<perlvar>

=over 4

=item *

Improve docs for lastparen, lastcloseparen

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

=over 4

=item Windows

The Windows Server 2003 SP1 Platform SDK build, with its early x64 compiler and
tools, was accidentally broken in Perl 5.27.9.  This has now been fixed.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Warnings produced from constant folding operations on overloaded
values no longer produce spurious "Use of uninitialized value"
warnings.  [perl #132683]

=item *

Fix for "mutator not seen in (lex = ...) .= ..." [perl #133441]

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.29.3 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.29.2 and contains approximately 150,000 lines of changes across 190 files
from 15 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 140,000 lines of changes to 92 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.29.3:

Andy Dougherty, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, David
Mitchell, Eugen Konkov, Graham Knop, H.Merijn Brand, James E Keenan, John SJ
Anderson, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Sawyer X, Slaven Rezic, Steve
Hay, Sullivan Beck, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
