=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5356delta - what is new for perl v5.35.6

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.35.5 release and the 5.35.6
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.35.4, first read
L<perl5355delta>, which describes differences between 5.35.4 and 5.35.5.

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 C<use v5.36> now disables bareword_filehandles, indirect, and multidimensional

The C<:5.36> bundle, loaded by C<use v5.36>, no longer includes
C<bareword_filehandles>, C<indirect>, or C<multidimensional> meaning that these
discouraged forms of syntax will not be allowed within the scope of that
version declaration.

This will also affect C<use v5.35.x>, even on subversions of v5.35 prior to
this one.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<bignum> has been upgraded from version 0.53 to 0.63.

=item *

L<diagnostics> has been upgraded from version 1.38 to 1.39.

=item *

L<feature> has been upgraded from version 1.68 to 1.69.

=item *

L<File::Glob> has been upgraded from version 1.36 to 1.37.

=item *

L<File::stat> has been upgraded from version 1.11 to 1.12.

=item *

L<GDBM_File> has been upgraded from version 1.21 to 1.22.

=item *

L<HTTP::Tiny> has been upgraded from version 0.078 to 0.080.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt> has been upgraded from version 1.999823 to 1.999827.

=item *

L<Math::BigInt::FastCalc> has been upgraded from version 0.5010 to 0.5012.

=item *

L<Math::BigRat> has been upgraded from version 0.2617 to 0.2620.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20211020 to 5.20211120.

=item *

L<POSIX> has been upgraded from version 2.01 to 2.02.

=item *

L<warnings> has been upgraded from version 1.55 to 1.56.

=back

=head1 Testing

Tests were added and changed to reflect the other additions and changes
in this release.

=head1 Platform Support

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

=over 4

=item DOS/DJGPP

DJGPP is a port of the GNU toolchain to 32-bit x86 systems running
DOS.  The last known attempt to build Perl on it was on 5.20, which
only got as far as building miniperl.

=item AT&T UWIN

UWIN is a UNIX compatibility layer for Windows.  It was last released
in 2012 and has been superseded by Cygwin these days.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

Setting a breakpoint on a BEGIN or equivalently a C<use> statement
could cause a memory write to a freed C<dbstate> op.
[L<GH #19198|https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues/19198>]

=back

=head1 Obituary

David H. Adler (DHA) passed away on November 16, 2021.  In 1997, David
co-founded NY.pm, the first Perl user group, and in 1998 co-founded Perl
Mongers to help establish other user groups across the globe.  He was a
frequent attendee at Perl conferences in both North America and Europe and
well known for his role in organizing I<Bad Movie Night> celebrations at those
conferences.  He also contributed to the work of the Perl Foundation,
including administering the White Camel awards for community service.  He will
be sorely missed.

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.35.6 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.35.5 and contains approximately 16,000 lines of changes across 320 files
from 10 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 13,000 lines of changes to 240 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.35.6:

Dagfinn Ilmari Mannsåker, H.Merijn Brand, James E Keenan, Leon Timmermans,
Pete Houston, Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Robert Rothenberg, Sergey
Poznyakoff, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
