=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl5332delta - what is new for perl v5.33.2

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.33.1 release and the 5.33.2
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.33.0, first read
L<perl5331delta>, which describes differences between 5.33.0 and 5.33.1.

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Archive::Tar> has been upgraded from version 2.36 to 2.38.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.093 to 2.096.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.093 to 2.096.

=item *

L<DB_File> has been upgraded from version 1.853 to 1.854.

=item *

L<Env> has been upgraded from version 1.04 to 1.05.

=item *

L<Errno> has been upgraded from version 1.31 to 1.32.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Install> has been upgraded from version 2.14 to 2.18.

=item *

L<Filter::Util::Call> has been upgraded from version 1.59 to 1.60.

=item *

IO-Compress has been upgraded from version 2.093 to 2.096.

=item *

L<IO::Socket::IP> has been upgraded from version 0.39 to 0.41.

=item *

L<IO::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 1.10 to 1.11.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20200820 to 5.20200920.

=item *

L<Module::Load::Conditional> has been upgraded from version 0.70 to 0.74.

=item *

L<Opcode> has been upgraded from version 1.47 to 1.48.

=item *

L<overload> has been upgraded from version 1.31 to 1.32.

=item *

L<PerlIO::scalar> has been upgraded from version 0.30 to 0.31.

=item *

L<Safe> has been upgraded from version 2.42 to 2.43.

=item *

L<Test::Simple> has been upgraded from version 1.302175 to 1.302181.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item * C<-Dusedefaultstrict>

EXPERIMENTAL: Perl can now be built with L<strict> on by default (using the
configuration option C<-Dusedefaultstrict>.

These strict defaults do not apply when C<perl> is run via C<-e> or C<-E>.

This setting provides a diagnostic mechanism for perl developers for
development and is intended for development purposes only and is thus turned
on by default.

=back

=head1 Acknowledgements

Perl 5.33.2 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl
5.33.1 and contains approximately 18,000 lines of changes across 380 files
from 19 authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 11,000 lines of changes to 260 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its fourth decade thanks to a vibrant
community of users and developers. The following people are known to have
contributed the improvements that became Perl 5.33.2:

Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Christian Walde (Mithaldu), Craig A. Berry, Dagfinn
Ilmari Mannsåker, David Mitchell, H.Merijn Brand, Hugo van der Sanden,
James E Keenan, John Lightsey, Karen Etheridge, Karl Williamson, Nicholas
Clark, Nicolas R., Ricardo Signes, Richard Leach, Sawyer X, Todd Rinaldo,
Tom Hukins, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically
generated from version control history. In particular, it does not include
the names of the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to
the Perl bug tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please
see the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/>, the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please open an issue at
L<https://github.com/Perl/perl5/issues>.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a
tiny but sufficient test case.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a public issue tracker, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 Give Thanks

If you wish to thank the Perl 5 Porters for the work we had done in Perl 5,
you can do so by running the C<perlthanks> program:

    perlthanks

This will send an email to the Perl 5 Porters list with your show of thanks.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
