=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

perl52511delta - what is new for perl v5.25.11

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.25.10 release and the 5.25.11
release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.25.9, first read
L<perl52510delta>, which describes differences between 5.25.9 and 5.25.10.

=head1 Notice

This release includes two important updates:

=over 4

=item * Turning on the removal of C<.> in C<@INC>

=item * Providing a warning when C<do> is used on a file in C<.>

=back

=head1 Security

=head2 Remove current dir (C<.>) from C<@INC>

For security reasons, C<@INC> no longer contains the default directory
(C<.>).

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Bzip2> has been upgraded from version 2.070 to 2.074.

=item *

L<Compress::Raw::Zlib> has been upgraded from version 2.070 to 2.074.

=item *

L<Config::Perl::V> has been upgraded from version 0.27 to 0.28.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::ParseXS> has been upgraded from version 3.33 to 3.34.

=item *

L<ExtUtils::Typemaps> has been upgraded from version 3.33 to 3.34.

=item *

L<File::Spec> has been upgraded from version 3.66 to 3.67.

=item *

L<Module::CoreList> has been upgraded from version 5.20170220 to 5.20170320.

=item *

L<Pod::Perldoc> has been upgraded from version 3.27 to 3.28.

=item *

L<Test::Harness> has been upgraded from version 3.36_01 to 3.38.

=item *

L<threads> has been upgraded from version 2.13 to 2.15.

=item *

L<threads::shared> has been upgraded from version 1.54 to 1.55.

=item *

L<VMS::Stdio> has been upgraded from version 2.42 to 2.41.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

=head2 New Diagnostics

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

Since C<.> is now removed from C<@INC> by default, C<do> will now trigger
a warning recommending to fix the C<do> statement:

L<do "%s" failed, '.' is no longer in @INC|perldiag/"do "%s" failed, '.'
is no longer in @INC; did you mean do "./%s"?>

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

=over 4

=item *

C<DEFAULT_INC_EXCLUDES_DOT> has been turned on as default.

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

=over 4

=item *

C< $-{$name} > would leak an C<AV> on each access if the regular
expression had no named captures.  The same applies to access to any
hash tied with L<Tie::Hash::NamedCapture> and C<< all =E<gt> 1 >>. [perl
#130822]

=back

=head1 Obituary

It is with great sadness we note that Kip Hampton passed away. Probably
best known as the author of the Perl & XML column on XML.com, he was a
core contributor to AxKit, ab XML server platform that became an Apache
Foundation project. He was a frequent speaker in the early days at
OSCON, and most recently at YAPC::NA in Madison. He was frequently on
irc.perl.org as `ubu`, generally in the #axkit-dahut community, the
group responsible for YAPC::NA Asheville in 2011.

Kip and his constant contributions to the community will be greatly missed.

=head1 Acknowledgements


Perl 5.25.11 represents approximately 4 weeks of development since Perl 5.25.10
and contains approximately 4,900 lines of changes across 240 files from 21
authors.

Excluding auto-generated files, documentation and release tools, there were
approximately 2,200 lines of changes to 170 .pm, .t, .c and .h files.

Perl continues to flourish into its third decade thanks to a vibrant community
of users and developers. The following people are known to have contributed the
improvements that became Perl 5.25.11:

Aaron Crane, Andy Lester, Chris 'BinGOs' Williams, Craig A. Berry, Dave Cross,
David Golden, David Mitchell, Dominic Hargreaves, H.Merijn Brand, Hugo van der
Sanden, James E Keenan, Jarkko Hietaniemi, Jerry D. Hedden, Karl Williamson,
Leon Timmermans, Matthew Horsfall, Renee Baecker, Sawyer X, Shlomi Fish, Steve
Hay, Tony Cook.

The list above is almost certainly incomplete as it is automatically generated
from version control history. In particular, it does not include the names of
the (very much appreciated) contributors who reported issues to the Perl bug
tracker.

Many of the changes included in this version originated in the CPAN modules
included in Perl's core. We're grateful to the entire CPAN community for
helping Perl to flourish.

For a more complete list of all of Perl's historical contributors, please see
the F<AUTHORS> file in the Perl source distribution.

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the perl bug database
at L<https://rt.perl.org/> .  There may also be information at
L<http://www.perl.org/> , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then see
L<perlsec/SECURITY VULNERABILITY CONTACT INFORMATION>
for details of how to report the issue.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
