=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

[ this is a template for a new perldelta file.  Any text flagged as XXX needs
to be processed before release. ]

perldelta - what is new for perl v5.20.0

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document describes differences between the 5.18.0 release and the
5.20.0 release.

If you are upgrading from an earlier release such as 5.16.0, first read
L<perl5180delta>, which describes differences between 5.16.0 and 5.18.0.

=head1 Notice

XXX Any important notices here

=head1 Core Enhancements

=head2 C<rand> now uses a consistent random number generator

Previously perl would use a platform specific random number generator, varying
between the libc rand(), random() or drand48().

This meant that the quality of perl's random numbers would vary from platform
to platform, from the 15 bits of rand() on Windows to 48-bits on POSIX
platforms such as Linux with drand48().

Perl now uses its own internal drand48() implementation on all platforms.  This
does not make perl's C<rand> cryptographically secure.  [perl #115928]

=head2 Better 64-bit support

On 64-bit platforms, the internal array functions now use 64-bit offsets,
allowing Perl arrays to hold more than 2**31 elements, if you have the memory
available.

The regular expression engine now supports strings longer than 2**31
characters.  [perl #112790, #116907]

The functions PerlIO_get_bufsiz, PerlIO_get_cnt, PerlIO_set_cnt and
PerlIO_set_ptrcnt now have SSize_t, rather than int, return values and
parameters.

=head2 New slice syntax

The new C<%hash{...}> and C<%array[...]> syntax returns a list of key/value (or
index/value) pairs.  See L<perldata/"Key/Value Hash Slices">.

=head2 More consistent prototype parsing

Multiple semicolons in subroutine prototypes have long been tolerated and
treated as a single semicolon.  There was one case where this did not
happen.  A subroutine whose prototype begins with "*" or ";*" can affect
whether a bareword is considered a method name or sub call.  This now
applies also to ";;;*".

Whitespace has long been allowed inside subroutine prototypes, so
C<sub( $ $ )> is equivalent to C<sub($$)>, but until now it was stripped
when the subroutine was parsed.  Hence, whitespace was I<not> allowed in
prototypes set by C<Scalar::Util::set_prototype>.  Now it is permitted,
and the parser no longer strips whitespace.  This means
C<prototype &mysub> returns the original prototype, whitespace and all.

=head2 B<-F> now implies B<-a> and B<-a> implies B<-n>

Previously B<-F> without B<-a> was a no-op, and B<-a> without B<-n> or B<-p>
was a no-op, with this change, if you supply B<-F> then both B<-a> and B<-n>
are implied and if you supply B<-a> then B<-n> is implied.

You can still use B<-p> for its extra behaviour. [perl #116190]

=head2 Unicode 6.3 now supported

Perl now supports and is shipped with Unicode 6.3 (though Perl may be
recompiled with any previous Unicode release as well).  A detailed list of
Unicode 6.3 changes is at L<http://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode6.3.0/>.

=head2 Experimental Postfix Dereferencing

When the C<postderef> feature is in effect, the following syntactical
equivalencies are set up:

  $sref->$*;  # same as ${ $sref }  # interpolates
  $aref->@*;  # same as @{ $aref }  # interpolates
  $href->%*;  # same as %{ $href }
  $cref->&*;  # same as &{ $cref }
  $gref->**;  # same as *{ $gref }

  $gref->*{ $slot }; # same as *{ $gref }{ $slot }

  $aref->@[ ... ];  # same as @$aref[ ... ]  # interpolates
  $href->@{ ... };  # same as @$href{ ... }  # interpolates
  $aref->%[ ... ];  # same as %$aref[ ... ]
  $href->%{ ... };  # same as %$href{ ... }

Those marked as interpolating only interpolate if the associated
C<postderef_qq> feature is also enabled.  This feature is B<experimental> and
will trigger C<experimental::postderef>-category warnings when used, unless
they are suppressed.

For more information, consult L<the Postfix Dereference Syntax section of
perlref|perlref/Postfix Dereference Syntax>.

=head2 C<sub>s now take a C<prototype> attribute

When declaring or defining a C<sub>, the prototype can now be specified inside
of a C<prototype> attribute instead of in parens following the name.

For example, C<sub foo($$){}> could be rewritten as
C<sub foo : prototype($$){}>.

=head1 Security

=head2 Avoid possible read of free()d memory during parsing

It was possible that free()d memory could be read during parsing in the unusual
circumstance of the Perl program ending with a heredoc and the last line of the
file on disk having no terminating newline character.  This has now been fixed.

=head1 Incompatible Changes

XXX For a release on a stable branch, this section aspires to be:

    There are no changes intentionally incompatible with 5.XXX.XXX
    If any exist, they are bugs, and we request that you submit a
    report.  See L</Reporting Bugs> below.

[ List each incompatible change as a =head2 entry ]

=head2 Most regex engine global state eliminated

As part of this series of fixes it was necessary to change the API of
Perl_re_intuit_start().  See L</Internal Changes> for more.

=head2 Locale decimal point character no longer leaks outside of S<C<use locale>> scope

This is actually a bug fix, but some code has come to rely on the bug
being present, so this change is listed here.  The current locale that
the program is running under is not supposed to be visible to Perl code
except within the scope of a S<C<use locale>>.  However, until now under
certain circumstances, the character used for a decimal point (often a
comma) leaked outside the scope.  If your code is affected by this
change, simply add a S<C<use locale>>.

=head2 Assignments of Windows sockets error codes to $! now prefer F<errno.h> values over WSAGetLastError() values

In previous versions of Perl, Windows sockets error codes as returned by
WSAGetLastError() were assigned to $!, and some constants such as ECONNABORTED,
not in F<errno.h> in VC++ (or the various Windows ports of gcc) were defined to
corresponding WSAE* values to allow $! to be tested against the E* constants
exported by L<Errno> and L<POSIX>.

This worked well until VC++ 2010 and later, which introduced new E* constants
with values E<gt> 100 into F<errno.h>, including some being (re)defined by perl
to WSAE* values.  That caused problems when linking XS code against other
libraries which used the original definitions of F<errno.h> constants.

To avoid this incompatibility, perl now maps WSAE* error codes to E* values
where possible, and assigns those values to $!.  The E* constants exported by
L<Errno> and L<POSIX> are updated to match so that testing $! against them,
wherever previously possible, will continue to work as expected, and all E*
constants found in F<errno.h> are now exported from those modules with their
original F<errno.h> values

In order to avoid breakage in existing Perl code which assigns WSAE* values to
$!, perl now intercepts the assignment and performs the same mapping to E*
values as it uses internally when assigning to $! itself.

However, one backwards-incompatibility remains: existing Perl code which
compares $! against the numeric values of the WSAE* error codes that were
previously assigned to $! will now be broken in those cases where a
corresponding E* value has been assigned instead.  This is only an issue for
those E* values E<lt> 100, which were always exported from L<Errno> and
L<POSIX> with their original F<errno.h> values, and therefore could not be used
for WSAE* error code tests (e.g. WSAEINVAL is 10022, but the corresponding
EINVAL is 22).  (E* values E<gt> 100, if present, were redefined to WSAE*
values anyway, so compatibility can be achieved by using the E* constants,
which will work both before and after this change, albeit using different
numeric values under the hood.)

=head2 Functions C<PerlIO_vsprintf> and C<PerlIO_sprintf> have been removed

These two functions, undocumented, unused in CPAN, and problematic, have been
removed.

=head1 Deprecations

The C</\C/> regular expression character class is deprecated. From perl
5.22 onwards it will generate a warning, and from perl 5.24 onwards it
will be a regular expression compiler error. If you need to examine the
individual bytes that make up a UTF8-encoded character, then use
C<utf8::encode()> on the string (or a copy) first.

=head2 Literal control characters in variable names

This deprecation affects things like $\cT, where \cT is a literal control in
the source code.  Surprisingly, it appears that originally this was intended as
the canonical way of accessing variables like $^T, with the caret form only
being added as an alternative.

The literal control form is being deprecated for two main reasons.  It has what
are likely unfixable bugs, such as $\cI not working as an alias for $^I, and
their usage not being portable to non-ASCII platforms: While $^T will work
everywhere, \cT is whitespace in EBCDIC.  [perl #119123]

=head2 Module removals

XXX Remove this section if inapplicable.

The following modules will be removed from the core distribution in a
future release, and will at that time need to be installed from CPAN.
Distributions on CPAN which require these modules will need to list them as
prerequisites.

The core versions of these modules will now issue C<"deprecated">-category
warnings to alert you to this fact.  To silence these deprecation warnings,
install the modules in question from CPAN.

Note that these are (with rare exceptions) fine modules that you are encouraged
to continue to use.  Their disinclusion from core primarily hinges on their
necessity to bootstrapping a fully functional, CPAN-capable Perl installation,
not usually on concerns over their design.

=over

XXX Note that deprecated modules should be listed here even if they are listed
as an updated module in the L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=back

[ List each other deprecation as a =head2 entry ]

=head1 Performance Enhancements

XXX Changes which enhance performance without changing behaviour go here.
There may well be none in a stable release.

[ List each enhancement as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

Perl has a new copy-on-write mechanism that avoids the need to copy the
internal string buffer when assigning from one scalar to another. This
makes copying large strings appear much faster.  Modifying one of the two
(or more) strings after an assignment will force a copy internally. This
makes it unnecessary to pass strings by reference for efficiency.

This feature was already available in 5.18.0, but wasn't enabled by
default. It is the default now, and so you no longer need build perl with
the F<Configure> argument:

    -Accflags=PERL_NEW_COPY_ON_WRITE

It can be disabled (for now) in a perl build with:

    -Accflags=PERL_NO_COW

=item *

Precomputed hash values are now used in more places during method lookup.

=item *

Perl has an optimizer for regular expression patterns.  It analyzes the pattern
to find things such as the minimum length a string has to be to match, etc.  It
now better handles code points that are above the Latin1 range.

=back

=head1 Modules and Pragmata

XXX All changes to installed files in F<cpan/>, F<dist/>, F<ext/> and F<lib/>
go here.  If Module::CoreList is updated, generate an initial draft of the
following sections using F<Porting/corelist-perldelta.pl>.  A paragraph summary
for important changes should then be added by hand.  In an ideal world,
dual-life modules would have a F<Changes> file that could be cribbed.

[ Within each section, list entries as a =item entry ]

=head2 New Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

XXX

=back

=head2 Updated Modules and Pragmata

=over 4

=item *

L<XXX> has been upgraded from version A.xx to B.yy.

=back

=head2 Removed Modules and Pragmata

The distributions below have been removed from the core, but are still
available on the CPAN.  In many cases, the named distribution includes
multiple modules, which are not listed individually.  For a
comprehensive list of removals, consult:

  $ corelist --dif 5.18.0 5.20.0 | grep absent

=over

=item Archive-Extract

=item B-Lint

=item CPANPLUS

=item File-CheckTree

=item Log-Message

=item Module-Pluggable

=item Object-Accessor

=item Pod-LaTeX

=item Term-UI

=item Text-Soundex

=back

=head1 Documentation

XXX Changes to files in F<pod/> go here.  Consider grouping entries by
file and be sure to link to the appropriate page, e.g. L<perlfunc>.

=head2 New Documentation

=head3 L<perlrepository>

This document was removed (actually, renamed L<perlgit> and given a major
overhaul) in Perl 5.13.10, causing Perl documentation websites to show the now
out of date version in Perl 5.12 as the latest version.  It has now been
restored in stub form, directing readers to current information.

=head2 Changes to Existing Documentation

XXX Changes which significantly change existing files in F<pod/> go here.
However, any changes to F<pod/perldiag.pod> should go in the L</Diagnostics>
section.

=head3 L<perldata>

=over 4

=item *

New sections have been added to document the new index/value array slice and
key/value hash slice syntax.

=back

=head3 L<perldebguts>

=over 4

=item *

The C<DB::goto> and C<DB::lsub> debugger subroutines are now documented.  [perl
#77680]

=back

=head3 L<perlexperiment>

=over

=item *

C<\s> matching C<\cK> is marked experimental

=item *

ithreads were accepted in 5.8.0

=item *

Long doubles are not experimental

=item *

Code in regular expressions, regular expression backtracking verbs,
and lvalue subroutines are no longer listed as experimental.  (This
also affects L<perlre> and L<perlsub>.)

=back

=head3 L<perlfunc>

=over

=item *

C<goto EXPR> is now documented to handle an expression that evalutes to a
code reference as if it was C<goto &$coderef>.  This behavior is at least ten
years old.

=item *

C<eval EXPR> now has caveats about expanding floating point numbers in some
locales

=item *

Noted that C<chop> and C<chomp> can reset the hash iterator

=item *

Improved C<fileno> example

=item *

Since Perl v5.10, it has been possible for subroutines in @INC to return
a reference to a scalar holding initial source code to prepend to the file.
This is now documented.

=item *

The documentation of C<ref> has been updated to recommend the use of
C<blessed>, C<isa> and C<reftype> when dealing with references to blessed
objects.

=back

=head3 L<perlguts>

=over 4

=item *

Numerous minor changes have been made to reflect changes made to the perl
internals in this release.

=back

=head3 L<perlhack>

=over 4

=item *

The L<SUPER QUICK PATCH GUIDE|perlhack/SUPER QUICK PATCH GUIDE> section has
been updated.

=back

=head3 L<perllocale>

=over

=item *

Update to mention fc(), \F

=back

=head3 L<perlop>

=over 4

=item *

The language design of Perl has always called for monomorphic operators.
This is now mentioned explicitly.

=back

=head3 L<perlopentut>

=over 4

=item *

The C<open> tutorial has been completely rewritten by Tom Christiansen, and now
focuses on covering only the basics, rather than providing a comprehensive
reference to all things openable.  This rewrite came as the result of a
vigorous discussion on perl5-porters kicked off by a set of improvements
written by Alexander Hartmaier to the existing L<perlopentut>.  A "more than
you ever wanted to know about C<open>" document may follow in subsequent
versions of perl.

=back

=head3 L<perlre>

=over 4

=item *

The fact that the regexp engine makes no effort to call (?{}) and (??{})
constructs any specified number of times (although it will basically DWIM
in case of a successful match) has been documented.

=item *

The C</r> modifier (for non-destructive substitution) is now documented. [perl
#119151]

=back

=head3 L<perlreguts>

=over 4

=item *

The documentation has been updated in the light of recent changes to
F<regcomp.c>.

=back

=head3 L<perlsub>

=over 4

=item *

The need to predeclare recursive functions with prototypes in order for the
prototype to be honoured in the recursive call is now documented. [perl #2726]

=item *

A list of subroutine names used by the perl implementation is now included.
[perl #77680]

=back

=head3 L<perltrap>

=over 4

=item *

There is now a L<JavaScript|perltrap/JavaScript Traps> section.

=back

=head3 L<perlvar>

=over 4

=item *

A new section explaining the performance issues of $`, $& and $', including
workarounds and changes in different versions of Perl, has been added.

=item *

Three L<English> variable names which have long been documented but do not
actually exist have been removed from the documentation.

=back

=head3 L<perlxs>

=over 4

=item *

Several problems in the C<MY_CXT> example have been fixed.

=back

=head1 Diagnostics

The following additions or changes have been made to diagnostic output,
including warnings and fatal error messages.  For the complete list of
diagnostic messages, see L<perldiag>.

XXX New or changed warnings emitted by the core's C<C> code go here.  Also
include any changes in L<perldiag> that reconcile it to the C<C> code.

=head2 New Diagnostics

XXX Newly added diagnostic messages go under here, separated into New Errors
and New Warnings

=head3 New Errors

=over 4

=item *

L<delete argument is indexE<sol>value array slice, use array slice|perldiag/"delete argument is index/value array slice, use array slice">

(F) You used index/value array slice syntax (C<%array[...]>) as the argument to
C<delete>.  You probably meant C<@array[...]> with an @ symbol instead.

=item *

L<delete argument is keyE<sol>value hash slice, use hash slice|perldiag/"delete argument is key/value hash slice, use hash slice">

(F) You used key/value hash slice syntax (C<%hash{...}>) as the argument to
C<delete>.  You probably meant C<@hash{...}> with an @ symbol instead.

=item *

L<Magical list constants are not supported|perldiag/"Magical list constants are
not supported">

(F) You assigned a magical array to a stash element, and then tried to use the
subroutine from the same slot.  You are asking Perl to do something it cannot
do, details subject to change between Perl versions.

=back

=head3 New Warnings

=over 4

=item *

L<Invalid \0 character in %s for %s: %s\0%s|perldiag/"Invalid \0 character in %s for %s: %s\0%s">

(W syscalls) Embedded \0 characters in pathnames or other system call arguments
produce a warning as of 5.20.  The parts after the \0 were formerly ignored by
system calls.

=item *

L<Possible precedence issue with control flow operator|perldiag/"Possible precedence issue with control flow operator">

(W syntax) There is a possible problem with the mixing of a control flow
operator (e.g. C<return>) and a low-precedence operator like C<or>.  Consider:

    sub { return $a or $b; }

This is parsed as:

    sub { (return $a) or $b; }

Which is effectively just:

    sub { return $a; }

Either use parentheses or the high-precedence variant of the operator.

Note this may be also triggered for constructs like:

    sub { 1 if die; }

=item *

L<Scalar value %%s[%s] better written as $%s[%s]|perldiag/"Scalar value %%s[%s] better written as $%s[%s]">

(W syntax) In scalar context, you've used an array index/value slice (indicated
by %) to select a single element of an array.  Generally it's better to ask for
a scalar value (indicated by $).  The difference is that C<$foo[&bar]> always
behaves like a scalar, both in the value it returns and when evaluating its
argument, while C<%foo[&bar]> provides a list context to its subscript, which
can do weird things if you're expecting only one subscript.  When called in
list context, it also returns the index (what C<&bar> returns) in addition to
the value.

=item *

L<Scalar value %%s{%s} better written as $%s{%s}|perldiag/"Scalar value %%s{%s} better written as $%s{%s}">

(W syntax) In scalar context, you've used a hash key/value slice (indicated by
%) to select a single element of a hash.  Generally it's better to ask for a
scalar value (indicated by $).  The difference is that C<$foo{&bar}> always
behaves like a scalar, both in the value it returns and when evaluating its
argument, while C<@foo{&bar}> and provides a list context to its subscript,
which can do weird things if you're expecting only one subscript.  When called
in list context, it also returns the key in addition to the value.

=item *

L<Use of literal control characters in variable names is deprecated|perldiag/"Use of literal control characters in variable names is deprecated">

(D deprecated) Using literal control characters in the source to refer to the
^FOO variables, like $^X and ${^GLOBAL_PHASE} is now deprecated.  This only
affects code like $\cT, where \cT is a control in the source code: ${"\cT"} and
$^T remain valid.

=item *

L<A sequence of multiple spaces in a charnames alias definition is deprecated|perldiag/"A sequence of multiple spaces in a charnames alias definition is deprecated">

L<Trailing white-space in a charnames alias definition is deprecated|perldiag/"Trailing white-space in a charnames alias definition is deprecated">

These two deprecation warnings involving C<\N{...}> were incorrectly
implemented.  They did not warn by default (now they do) and could not be
made fatal via C<< use warnings FATAL => 'deprecated' >> (now they can).

=item *

L<Missing ']' in prototype for %s : %s|perldiag/"Missing ']' in prototype
for %s : %s">

(W illegalproto) A grouping was started with C<[> but never closed with
C<]>.

=item *

L<Argument "%s" treated as 0 in increment (++)|perldiag/"Argument "%s" treated
as 0 in increment (++)">

(W numeric) The indicated string was fed as an argument to the C<++> operator
which expects either a number or a string matching C</^[a-zA-Z]*[0-9]*\z/>.
See L<perlop/Auto-increment and Auto-decrement> for details.

=item *

L<Unexpected exit %u|perldiag/"Unexpected exit %u">

(S) exit() was called or the script otherwise finished gracefully when
C<PERL_EXIT_WARN> was set in C<PL_exit_flags>.

=item *

L<Unexpected exit failure %u|perldiag/"Unexpected exit failure %u">

(S) An uncaught die() was called when C<PERL_EXIT_WARN> was set in
C<PL_exit_flags>.

=item *

L<Attribute prototype(%s) discards earlier prototype attribute in same sub|perldiag/"Attribute prototype(%s) discards earlier prototype attribute in same sub">

(W misc) A sub was declared as sub foo : prototype(A) : prototype(B) {}, for
example.  Since each sub can only have one prototype, the earlier
declaration(s) are discarded while the last one is applied.

=item *

L<Postfix dereference is experimental|perldiag/"Postfix dereference is experimental">

(S experimental::postderef) This warning is emitted if you use the experimental
postfix dereference syntax.  Simply suppress the warning if you want to use the
feature, but know that in doing so you are taking the risk of using an
experimental feature which may change or be removed in a future Perl version:

    no warnings "experimental::postderef";
    use feature "postderef", "postderef_qq";
    $ref->$*;
    $aref->@*;
    $aref->@[@indices];
    ... etc ...

=item *

L<Prototype '%s' overridden by attribute 'prototype(%s)' in %s|perldiag/"Prototype '%s' overridden by attribute 'prototype(%s)' in %s">

(W prototype) A prototype was declared in both the parentheses after the sub
name and via the prototype attribute.  The prototype in parentheses is useless,
since it will be replaced by the prototype from the attribute before it's ever
used.

=back

=head2 Changes to Existing Diagnostics

=over 4

=item *

Warnings and errors from the regexp engine are now UTF-8 clean

=item *

The "Unknown switch condition" error message has some slight changes.  This
error triggers when there is an unknown condition in a C<(?(foo))> conditional.
The error message used to read:

    Unknown switch condition (?(%s in regex;

But what %s could be was mostly up to luck.  For C<(?(foobar))>, you might have
seen "fo" or "f".  For Unicode characters, you would generally get a corrupted
string.  The message has been changed to read:

    Unknown switch condition (?(...)) in regex;

Additionally, the C<'E<lt>-- HERE'> marker in the error will now point to the
correct spot in the regex.

=item *

The "%s "\x%X" does not map to Unicode" warning is now correctly listed as a
severe warning rather than as a fatal error.

=item *

Under rare circumstances, one could get a "Can't coerce readonly REF to
string" instead of the customary "Modification of a read-only value".  This
alternate error message has been removed.

=item *

"Ambiguous use of * resolved as operator *": This and similar warnings
about "%" and "&" used to occur in some circumstances where there was no
operator of the type cited, so the warning was completely wrong.  This has
been fixed [perl #117535, #76910].

=item *

Warnings about malformed subroutine prototypes are now more consistent in
how the prototypes are rendered.  Some of these warnings would truncate
prototypes containing nulls.  In other cases one warning would suppress
another.  The warning about illegal characters in prototypes no longer says
"after '_'" if the bad character came before the underscore.

=item *

L<Perl folding rules are not up-to-date for 0x%X; please use the perlbug
utility to report; in regex; marked by <-- HERE in
mE<sol>%sE<sol>|perldiag/"Perl folding rules are not up-to-date for 0x%X;
please use the perlbug utility to report; in regex; marked by <-- HERE in
m/%s/">

This message is now only in the regexp category, and not in the deprecated
category.  It is still a default (i.e., severe) warning [perl #89648].

=item *

The debugger's "n" command now respects lvalue subroutines and steps over
them [perl #118839].

=back

=head1 Utility Changes

=head3 L<a2p>

=over 4

=item *

A possible crash from an off-by-one error when trying to access before the
beginning of a buffer has been fixed.  [perl #120244]

=back

=head3 L<find2perl>

=over 4

=item *

L<find2perl> now handles C<?> wildcards correctly.  [perl #113054]

=back

=head3 F<bisect.pl> enhancements

The git bisection tool F<Porting/bisect.pl> has had many enhancements.

It is provided as part of the source distribution but not installed because
it is not self-contained as it relies on being run from within a git
checkout. Note also that it makes no attempt to fix tests, correct runtime
bugs or make something useful to install - its purpose is to make minimal
changes to get any historical revision of interest to build and run as close
as possible to "as-was", and thereby make C<git bisect> easy to use.

=over 4

=item *

Can optionally run the test case with a timeout.

=item *

Can now run in-place in a clean git checkout.

=item *

Can run the test case under C<valgrind>.

=item *

Can apply user supplied patches and fixes to the source checkout before
building.

=item *

Now has fixups to enable building several more historical ranges of bleadperl,
which can be useful for pinpointing the origins of bugs or behaviour changes.

=back

=head1 Configuration and Compilation

XXX Changes to F<Configure>, F<installperl>, F<installman>, and analogous tools
go here.  Any other changes to the Perl build process should be listed here.
However, any platform-specific changes should be listed in the
L</Platform Support> section, instead.

[ List changes as a =item entry ].

=over 4

=item *

The F<Makefile.PL> for L<SDBM_File> now generates a better F<Makefile>, which
avoids a race condition during parallel makes, which could cause the build to
fail.  This is the last known parallel make problem (on *nix platforms), and
therefore we believe that a parallel make should now always be error free.

=item *

F<installperl> and F<installman>'s option handling has been refactored to use
L<Getopt::Long>. Both are used by the F<Makefile> C<install> targets, and
are not installed, so these changes are only likely to affect custom
installation scripts.

=over 4

=item *

single letter options now also have long names

=item *

invalid options are now rejected

=item *

command line arguments that are not options are now rejected

=item *

Each now has a C<--help> option to display the usage message.

=back

The behaviour for all valid documented invocations is unchanged.

=back

=head1 Testing

XXX Any significant changes to the testing of a freshly built perl should be
listed here.  Changes which create B<new> files in F<t/> go here as do any
large changes to the testing harness (e.g. when parallel testing was added).
Changes to existing files in F<t/> aren't worth summarizing, although the bugs
that they represent may be covered elsewhere.

[ List each test improvement as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

The new prototype attribute syntax is tested by a new test script,
F<t/op/attrproto.t>.

=item *

The new test script F<t/io/closepid.t> tests that C<close> on the original of a
popen handle dupped to a standard handle no longer blocks internally on
C<waitpid(0, ...)>.

=item *

The new postfix dereference syntax is tested by a new test script,
F<t/op/postfixderef.t>.


=item *

The behaviour of C<pos> on very large strings is now tested in the new test
script F<t/bigmem/pos.t>.

=item *

The test script F<t/porting/ss_dup.t> has been created to test that ss_dup()
handles all savestack items.

=item *

The new behaviour of B<-F> and B<-a> (see the L</Core Enhancements> section) is
tested in the new test script F<t/run/switchF2.t>.

=item *

The test script F<t/bigmem/regexp.t> has been added to test that regular
expression matches on very large strings now succeed as expected.

=item *

A bug that was fixed in Perl 5.15.4 is now tested by the new test script
F<t/io/eintr_print.t>.  [perl #119097]

=item *

The new test scripts F<t/op/kvaslice.t> and F<t/op/kvhslice.t> test the new
index/value array slice and key/value hash slice syntax respectively.

=item *

Various cases of C<die>, C<last>, C<goto> and C<exit> triggering C<DESTROY> are
now tested by the new test script F<t/op/rt119311.t>.

=item *

The new test script F<t/op/waitpid.t> tests the fix for [perl #85228] (see
L</Selected Bug Fixes>).

=item *

The latest copyright years in the top-level F<README> file and the B<perl -v>
output are now tested as matching each other by the new test script
F<t/porting/copyright.t>

=item *

The new test script F<t/win32/signal.t> tests that $! and $^E are now preserved
across signal handlers by the Win32 signal emulation code.

=item *

The test script F<t/x2p/find2perl.t> has been added to test the F<find2perl>
program on platforms where it is practical to do so.

=back

=head1 Platform Support

XXX Any changes to platform support should be listed in the sections below.

[ Within the sections, list each platform as a =item entry with specific
changes as paragraphs below it. ]

=head2 New Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl compiles on, that previous
versions did not.  These will either be enabled by new files in the F<hints/>
directories, or new subdirectories and F<README> files at the top level of the
source tree.

=over 4

=item FreeMiNT

Support has been added for FreeMiNT, a free open-source OS for the Atari ST
system and its successors, based on the original MiNT that was officially
adopted by Atari.

=item Bitrig

Compile support has been added for Bitrig, a fork of OpenBSD.

=back

=head2 Discontinued Platforms

XXX List any platforms that this version of perl no longer compiles on.

=over 4

=item AT&T 3b1

Configure support for the 3b1, also known as the AT&T Unix PC (and the similar
AT&T 7300), has been removed.

=item DG/UX

DG/UX was a Unix sold by Data General. The last release was in April 2001.
It only runs on Data General's own hardware.

=back

=head2 Platform-Specific Notes

XXX List any changes for specific platforms.  This could include configuration
and compilation changes or changes in portability/compatibility.  However,
changes within modules for platforms should generally be listed in the
L</Modules and Pragmata> section.

=over 4

=item MidnightBSD

C<objformat> was removed from version 0.4-RELEASE of MidnightBSD and had been
deprecated on earlier versions.  This caused the build environment to be
erroneously configured for C<a.out> rather than C<elf>.  This has been now
been corrected.

=item Mixed-endian platforms

The code supporting C<pack> and C<unpack> operations on mixed endian
platforms has been removed. We believe that Perl has long been unable to
build on mixed endian architectures (such as PDP-11s), so we don't think
that this change will affect any platforms which are able to build v5.18.0.

=item VMS

The C<PERL_ENV_TABLES> feature to control the population of %ENV at perl
start-up was broken in Perl 5.16.0 but has now been fixed.

=item Win32

C<rename> and C<link> on Win32 now set $! to ENOSPC and EDQUOT when
appropriate.  [perl #119857]

=item WinCE

Perl now builds again on WinCE, following locale-related breakage (WinCE has
non-existent locale support) introduced around 5.19.1.  [perl #119443]

The building of XS modules has largely been restored.  Several still cannot
(yet) be built but it is now possible to build Perl on WinCE with only a couple
of further patches (to L<Socket> and L<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>), hopefully to be
incorporated soon.

=item GNU/Hurd

The BSD compatibility library C<libbsd> is no longer required for builds.

=item Windows

The BUILD_STATIC and ALL_STATIC makefile options for linking some or (nearly)
all extensions statically (into perl519.dll, and into a separate
perl-static.exe too) were broken for MinGW builds. This has now been fixed.

The ALL_STATIC option has also been improved to include the Encode and Win32
extensions (for both VC++ and MinGW builds).

=item Windows

The Windows MinGW/gcc build was broken in Perl 5.19.4 for some recent versions
of gcc-4.8, including those from http://mingw-w64.sourceforge.net/ .  This has
now been fixed.  [perl #120236]

=back

=head1 Internal Changes

=over 4

=item *

The internal representation has changed for the match variables $1, $2 etc.,
$`, $&, $', ${^PREMATCH}, ${^MATCH} and ${^POSTMATCH}.  It uses slightly less
memory, avoids string comparisons and numeric conversions during lookup, and
uses 23 fewer lines of C.  This change should not affect any external code.

=item *

Arrays now use NULL internally to represent unused slots, instead of
&PL_sv_undef.  &PL_sv_undef is no longer treated as a special value, so
av_store(av, 0, &PL_sv_undef) will cause element 0 of that array to hold a
read-only undefined scalar.  C<$array[0] = anything> will croak and
C<\$array[0]> will compare equal to C<\undef>.

=item *

The SV returned by HeSVKEY_force() now correctly reflects the UTF8ness of the
underlying hash key when that key is not stored as a SV.  [perl #79074]

=item *

Certain rarely used functions and macros available to XS code are now, or are
planned to be, deprecated.  These are:
C<utf8n_to_uvuni> (use C<utf8_to_uvchr_buf> instead),
C<utf8_to_uni_buf> (use C<utf8_to_uvchr_buf> instead),
C<valid_utf8_to_uvuni> (use C<utf8_to_uvchr_buf> instead),
C<uvuni_to_utf8> (use C<uvchr_to_utf8> instead),
C<NATIVE_TO_NEED> (this did not work properly anyway),
and C<ASCII_TO_NEED>  (this did not work properly anyway).

Starting in this release, almost never does application code need to
distinguish between the platform's character set and Latin1, on which the
lowest 256 characters of Unicode are based.

=item *

The Makefile shortcut targets for many rarely (or never) used testing and
profiling targets have been removed, or merged into the only other Makefile
target that uses them.  Specifically, these targets are gone, along with
documentation that referenced them or explained how to use them:

    check.third check.utf16 check.utf8 coretest minitest.prep
    minitest.utf16 perl.config.dashg perl.config.dashpg
    perl.config.gcov perl.gcov perl.gprof perl.gprof.config
    perl.pixie perl.pixie.atom perl.pixie.config perl.pixie.irix
    perl.third perl.third.config perl.valgrind.config purecovperl
    pureperl quantperl test.deparse test.taintwarn test.third
    test.torture test.utf16 test.utf8 test_notty.deparse
    test_notty.third test_notty.valgrind test_prep.third
    test_prep.valgrind torturetest ucheck ucheck.third ucheck.utf16
    ucheck.valgrind utest utest.third utest.utf16 utest.valgrind

It's still possible to run the relevant commands by "hand" - no underlying
functionality has been removed.

=item *

It is now possible to keep Perl from initializing locale handling.
For the most part, Perl doesn't pay attention to locale.  (See
L<perllocale>.)  Nonetheless, until now, on startup, it has always
initialized locale handling to the system default, just in case the
program being executed ends up using locales.  (This is one of the first
things a locale-aware program should do, long before Perl knows if it
will actually be needed or not.)  This works well except when Perl is
embedded in another application which wants a locale that isn't the
system default.  Now, if the environment variable
C<PERL_SKIP_LOCALE_INIT> is set at the time Perl is started, this
initialization step is skipped.  Prior to this, on Windows platforms,
the only workaround for this deficiency was to use a hacked-up copy of
internal Perl code.  Applications that need to use older Perls can
discover if the embedded Perl they are using needs the workaround by
testing that the C preprocessor symbol C<HAS_SKIP_LOCALE_INIT> is not
defined.  (RT #38193)

=item *

C<BmRARE> and C<BmPREVIOUS> have been removed.  They were not used anywhere
and are not part of the API.  For XS modules, they are now #defined as 0.

=item *

C<sv_force_normal>, which usually croaks on read-only values, used to allow
read-only values to be modified at compile time.  This has been changed to
croak on read-only values regardless.  This change uncovered several core
bugs.

=item *

Perl's new copy-on-write mechanism  (which is now enabled by default),
allows any C<SvPOK> scalar to be automatically upgraded to a copy-on-write
scalar when copied. A reference count on the string buffer is stored in
the string buffer itself.

For example:

    $ perl -MDevel::Peek -e'$a="abc"; $b = $a; Dump $a; Dump $b'
    SV = PV(0x260cd80) at 0x2620ad8
      REFCNT = 1
      FLAGS = (POK,IsCOW,pPOK)
      PV = 0x2619bc0 "abc"\0
      CUR = 3
      LEN = 16
      COW_REFCNT = 1
    SV = PV(0x260ce30) at 0x2620b20
      REFCNT = 1
      FLAGS = (POK,IsCOW,pPOK)
      PV = 0x2619bc0 "abc"\0
      CUR = 3
      LEN = 16
      COW_REFCNT = 1

Note that both scalars share the same PV buffer and have a COW_REFCNT
greater than zero.

This means that XS code which wishes to modify the C<SvPVX()> buffer of an
SV should call C<SvPV_force()> or similar first, to ensure a valid (and
unshared) buffer, and to call C<SvSETMAGIC()> afterwards. This in fact has
always been the case (for example hash keys were already copy-on-write);
this change just spreads the COW behaviour to a wider variety of SVs.

One important difference is that before 5.18.0, shared hash-key scalars
used to have the C<SvREADONLY> flag set; this is no longer the case.

This new behaviour can still be disabled by running F<Configure> with
B<-Accflags=-DPERL_NO_COW>.  This option will probably be removed in Perl
5.22.

=item *

C<PL_sawampersand> is now a constant.  The switch this variable provided
(to enable/disable the pre-match copy depending on whether C<$&> had been
seen) has been removed and replaced with copy-on-write, eliminating a few
bugs.

The previous behaviour can still be enabled by running F<Configure> with
B<-Accflags=-DPERL_SAWAMPERSAND>.

=item *

The functions C<my_swap>, C<my_htonl> and C<my_ntohl> have been removed.
It is unclear why these functions were ever marked as I<A>, part of the
API. XS code can't call them directly, as it can't rely on them being
compiled. Unsurprisingly, no code on CPAN references them.

=item *

The signature of the C<Perl_re_intuit_start()> regex function has changed;
the function pointer C<intuit> in the regex engine plugin structure
has also changed accordingly. A new parameter, C<strbeg> has been added;
this has the same meaning as the same-named parameter in
C<Perl_regexec_flags>. Previously intuit would try to guess the start of
the string from the passed SV (if any), and would sometimes get it wrong
(e.g. with an overloaded SV).

=item *

XS code may use various macros to change the case of a character or code
point (for example C<toLOWER_utf8()>).  Only a couple of these were
documented until now;
and now they should be used in preference to calling the underlying
functions.  See L<perlapi/Character case changing>.

=item *

The code dealt rather inconsistently with uids and gids. Some
places assumed that they could be safely stored in UVs, others
in IVs, others in ints. Four new macros are introduced:
SvUID(), sv_setuid(), SvGID(), and sv_setgid()

=item *

C<sv_pos_b2u_flags> has been added to the API.  It is similar to C<sv_pos_b2u>,
but supports long strings on 64-bit platforms.

=item *

C<PL_exit_flags> can now be used by perl embedders or other XS code to have
perl C<warn> or C<abort> on an attempted exit. [perl #52000]

=back

=head1 Selected Bug Fixes

XXX Important bug fixes in the core language are summarized here.  Bug fixes in
files in F<ext/> and F<lib/> are best summarized in L</Modules and Pragmata>.

[ List each fix as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

The OP allocation code now returns correctly aligned memory in all cases
for C<struct pmop>. Previously it could return memory only aligned to a
4-byte boundary, which is not correct for an ithreads build with 64 bit IVs
on some 32 bit platforms. Notably, this caused the build to fail completely
on sparc GNU/Linux. [RT #118055]

=item *

The debugger's C<man> command been fixed. It was broken in the v5.18.0
release. The C<man> command is aliased to the names C<doc> and C<perldoc> -
all now work again.

=item *

C<@_> is now correctly visible in the debugger, fixing a regression
introduced in v5.18.0's debugger. [RT #118169]

=item *

Evaluating large hashes in scalar context is now much faster, as the number
of used chains in the hash is now cached for larger hashes. Smaller hashes
continue not to store it and calculate it when needed, as this saves one IV.
That would be 1 IV overhead for every object built from a hash. [RT #114576]

=item *

Fixed a small number of regexp constructions that could either fail to
match or crash perl when the string being matched against was
allocated above the 2GB line on 32-bit systems. [RT #118175]

=item *

Perl v5.16 inadvertently introduced a bug whereby calls to XSUBs that were
not visible at compile time were treated as lvalues and could be assigned
to, even when the subroutine was not an lvalue sub.  This has been fixed.
[RT #117947]

=item *

In Perl v5.18.0 dualvars that had an empty string for the string part but a
non-zero number for the number part starting being treated as true.  In
previous versions they were treated as false, the string representation
taking precedeence.  The old behaviour has been restored. [RT #118159]

=item *

Since Perl v5.12, inlining of constants that override built-in keywords of
the same name had countermanded C<use subs>, causing subsequent mentions of
the constant to use the built-in keyword instead.  This has been fixed.

=item *

Lexical constants (C<my sub a() { 42 }>) no longer crash when inlined.

=item *

Parameter prototypes attached to lexical subroutines are now respected when
compiling sub calls without parentheses.  Previously, the prototypes were
honoured only for calls I<with> parentheses. [RT #116735]

=item *

Syntax errors in lexical subroutines in combination with calls to the same
subroutines no longer cause crashes at compile time.

=item *

Deep recursion warnings no longer crash lexical subroutines. [RT #118521]

=item *

The warning produced by C<-l $handle> now applies to IO refs and globs, not
just to glob refs.  That warning is also now UTF8-clean. [RT #117595]

=item *

Various memory leaks involving the parsing of the C<(?[...])> regular
expression construct have been fixed.

=item *

C<(?[...])> now allows interpolation of precompiled patterns consisting of
C<(?[...])> with bracketed character classes inside (C<$pat =
S<qr/(?[ [a] ])/;> S</(?[ $pat ])/>>).  Formerly, the brackets would
confuse the regular expression parser.

=item *

The "Quantifier unexpected on zero-length expression" warning message could
appear twice starting in Perl v5.10 for a regular expression also
containing alternations (e.g., "a|b") triggering the trie optimisation.

=item *

C<delete local $ENV{nonexistent_env_var}> no longer leaks memory.

=item *

C<sort> and C<require> followed by a keyword prefixed with C<CORE::> now
treat it as a keyword, and not as a subroutine or module name. [RT #24482]

=item *

Through certain conundrums, it is possible to cause the current package to
be freed.  Certain operators (C<bless>, C<reset>, C<open>, C<eval>) could
not cope and would crash.  They have been made more resilient. [RT #117941]

=item *

Aliasing filehandles through glob-to-glob assignment would not update
internal method caches properly if a package of the same name as the
filehandle existed, resulting in filehandle method calls going to the
package instead.  This has been fixed.

=item *

C<./Configure -de -Dusevendorprefix> didn't default [RT #64126]

=item *

The C<Statement unlikely to be reached> warning was listed in
L<perldiag> as an C<exec>-category warning, but was enabled and disabled
by the C<syntax> category.  On the other hand, the C<exec> category
controlled its fatal-ness.  It is now entirely handled by the C<exec>
category.

=item *

The "Replacement list is longer that search list" warning for C<tr///> and
C<y///> no longer occurs in the presence of the C</c> flag. [RT #118047]

=item *

Perl v5.18 inadvertently introduced a bug whereby interpolating mixed up-
and down-graded UTF-8 strings in a regex could result in malformed UTF-8
in the pattern: specifically if a downgraded character in the range
C<\x80..\xff> followed a UTF-8 string, e.g.

    utf8::upgrade(  my $u = "\x{e5}");
    utf8::downgrade(my $d = "\x{e5}");
    /$u$d/

[RT #118297]

=item *

Stringification of NVs are not cached so that the lexical locale controls
stringification of the decimal point [perl #108378] [perl #115800]

=item *

There have been several fixes related to Perl's handling of locales.  perl
#38193 was described above in L</Internal Changes>.
Also fixed is #112208 in which the error string in C<$!> displayed as
garbage in many UTF-8 locales;
#118197, where the radix (decimal point) character had to be an ASCII
character (which doesn't work for some non-Western languages);
and #115808, in which C<POSIX::setlocale()> on failure returned an
C<undef> which didn't warn about not being defined even if those
warnings were enabled.

=item *

The dtrace sub-entry probe now works with lexical subs, instead of
crashing [perl #118305].

=item *

Compiling a C<split> operator whose third argument is a named constant
evaulating to 0 no longer causes the constant's value to change.

=item *

A named constant used as the second argument to C<index> no longer gets
coerced to a string if it is a reference, regular expression, dualvar, etc.

=item *

A named constant evaluating to the undefined value used as the second
argument to C<index> no longer produces "uninitialized" warnings at compile
time.  It will still produce them at run time.

=item *

When a scalar was returned from a subroutine in @INC, the referenced scalar
was magically converted into an IO thingy, possibly resulting in "Bizarre
copy" errors if that scalar continued to be used elsewhere.  Now Perl uses
an internal copy of the scalar instead.

=item *

Undefining an inlinable lexical subroutine (C<my sub foo() { 42 } undef
&foo>) would result in a crash if warnings were turned on.

=item *

Certain uses of the C<sort> operator are optimised to modify an array in
place, such as C<@a = sort @a>.  During the sorting, the array is made
read-only.  If a sort block should happen to die, then the array remained
read-only even outside the C<sort>.  This has been fixed.

=item *

C<$a> and C<$b> inside a sort block are aliased to the actual arguments to
C<sort>, so they can be modified through those two variables.  This did not
always work, e.g., for lvalue subs and C<$#ary>, and probably many other
operators.  It works now.

=item *

The arguments to C<sort> are now all in list context.  If the C<sort>
itself were called in void or scalar context, then I<some>, but not all, of
the arguments used to be in void or scalar context.

=item *

Subroutine prototypes with Unicode characters above U+00FF were getting
mangled during closure cloning.  This would happen with subroutines closing
over lexical variables declared outside, and with lexical subs.

=item *

In regular expressions containing multiple code blocks, the values of
C<$1>, C<$2>, etc., set by nested regular expression calls would leak from
one block to the next.  Now these variables always refer to the outer
regular expression at the start of an embedded block [perl #117917].

=item *

C<UNIVERSAL::can> now treats its first argument the same way that method
calls do: Typeglobs and glob references with non-empty IO slots are treated
as handles, and strings are treated as filehandles, rather than packages,
if a handle with that name exists [perl #113932].

=item *

Method calls on typeglobs (e.g., C<< *ARGV->getline >>) used to stringify
the typeglob and then look it up again.  Combined with changes in Perl
5.18.0, this allowed C<< *foo->bar >> to call methods on the "foo" package
(like C<< foo->bar >>).  In some cases it could cause the method to be
called on the wrong handle.  Now a typeglob argument is treated as a
handle (just like C<< (\*foo)->bar >>), or, if its IO slot is empty, an
error is raised.

=item *

Under copy-on-write builds (the default as of 5.19.1) C<< ${'_<-e'}[0] >>
no longer gets mangled.  This is the first line of input saved for the
debugger's use for one-liners [perl #118627].

=item *

Assigning a vstring to a tied variable or to a subroutine argument aliased
to a nonexistent hash or array element now works, without flattening the
vstring into a regular string.

=item *

C<pos>, C<tie>, C<tied> and C<untie> did not work
properly on subroutine arguments aliased to nonexistent
hash and array elements [perl #77814, #27010].

=item *

The C<< => >> fat arrow operator can now quote built-in keywords even if it
occurs on the next line, making it consistent with how it treats other
barewords.

=item *

Autovivifying a subroutine stub via C<\&$glob> started causing crashes in Perl
5.18.0 if the $glob was merely a copy of a real glob, i.e., a scalar that had
had a glob assigned to it.  This has been fixed. [perl #119051]

=item *

On 64-bit platforms C<pos> can now be set to a value higher than 2**31-1.
[perl #72766]

=item *

Perl used to leak an implementation detail when it came to referencing the
return values of certain operators.  C<for ($a+$b) { warn \$_; warn \$_ }> used
to display two different memory addresses, because the C<\> operator was
copying the variable.  Under threaded builds, it would also happen for
constants (C<for(1) { ... }>).  This has been fixed. [perl #21979, #78194,
#89188, #109746, #114838, #115388]

=item *

The range operator C<..> was returning the same modifiable scalars with each
call, unless it was the only thing in a C<foreach> loop header.  This meant
that changes to values within the list returned would be visible the next time
the operator was executed. [perl #3105]

=item *

Constant folding and subroutine inlining no longer cause operations that would
normally return new modifiable scalars to return read-only values instead.

=item *

Closures of the form C<sub () { $some_variable }> are no longer inlined,
causing changes to the variable to be ignored by callers of the subroutine.
[perl #79908]

=item *

Return values of certain operators such as C<ref> would sometimes be shared
between recursive calls to the same subroutine, causing the inner call to
modify the value returned by C<ref> in the outer call.  This has been fixed.

=item *

C<__PACKAGE__> and constants returning a package name or hash key are now
consistently read-only.  In various previous Perl releases, they have become
mutable under certain circumstances.

=item *

C</$qr/p> was broken in Perl 5.18.0; the C</p> flag was ignored.  This has been
fixed. [perl #118213]

=item *

Starting in Perl 5.18.0, a construct like C</[#](?{})/x> would have its C<#>
incorrectly interpreted as a comment.  The code block would be skipped,
unparsed.  This has been corrected.

=item *

Starting in Perl 5.001, a regular expression like C</[#$a]/x> or C</[#]$a/x>
would have its C<#> incorrectly interpreted as a comment, so the variable would
not interpolate.  This has been corrected. [perl #45667]

=item *

On non-threaded builds, setting C<${"_E<lt>filename"}> to a reference or
typeglob no longer causes C<__FILE__> and some error messages to produce a
corrupt string, and no longer prevents C<#line> directives in string evals from
providing the source lines to the debugger.  Threaded builds were unaffected.

=item *

Enabling "used once" warnings no longer causes crashes on stash circularities
created at compile time (C<*Foo::Bar::Foo:: = *Foo::>).

=item *

Undef constants used in hash keys (C<use constant u =E<gt> undef; $h{+u}>) no
longer produce "uninitialized" warnings at compile time.

=item *

Modifying a substitution target inside the substitution replacement no longer
causes crashes.

=item *

The first statement inside a string eval used to use the wrong pragma setting
sometimes during constant folding.  C<eval 'uc chr 0xe0'> would randomly choose
between Unicode, byte, and locale semantics.  This has been fixed.

=item *

The handling of return values of @INC filters (subroutines returned by
subroutines in @INC) has been fixed in various ways.  Previously tied variables
were mishandled, and setting $_ to a reference or typeglob could result in
crashes.

=item *

The C<SvPVbyte> XS function has been fixed to work with tied scalars returning
something other than a string.  It used to return utf8 in those cases where
C<SvPV> would.

=item *

Perl 5.18.0 inadvertently made dereferenced regular expressions
S<(C<${ qr// }>)> false as booleans.  This has been fixed.

=item *

Perl 5.18.0 inadvertently made C<--> and C<++> crash on dereferenced regular
expressions, and stopped C<++> from flattening vstrings.

=item *

C<bless> no longer dies with "Can't bless non-reference value" if its first
argument is a tied reference.

=item *

C<reset> with an argument no longer skips copy-on-write scalars, regular
expressions, typeglob copies, and vstrings.  Also, when encountering those or
read-only values, it no longer skips any array or hash with the same name.

=item *

C<reset> with an argument now skips scalars aliased to typeglobs
(C<for $z (*foo) { reset "z" }>).  Previously it would corrupt memory or crash.

=item *

C<ucfirst> and C<lcfirst> were not respecting the bytes pragma.  This was a
regression from Perl 5.12. [perl #117355]

=item *

The use of C<\G> in regular expressions, where it's not at the start of the
pattern, is now slightly less buggy (although it is still somewhat
problematic).

=item *

Where a regular expression included code blocks (C</(?{...})/>), and where the
use of constant overloading triggered a re-compilation of the code block, the
second compilation didn't see its outer lexical scope.  This was a regression
in Perl 5.18.0.

=item *

Changes to C<UNIVERSAL::DESTROY> now update DESTROY caches in all classes,
instead of causing classes that have already had objects destroyed to continue
using the old sub.  This was a regression in Perl 5.18. [perl #114864]

=item *

All known false-positive occurrences of the deprecation warning "Useless use of
'\'; doesn't escape metacharacter '%c'", added in Perl 5.18.0, have been
removed. [perl #119101]

=item *

The value of $^E is now saved across signal handlers on Windows.  [perl #85104]

=item *

A lexical filehandle (as in C<open my $fh...>) is usually given a name based on
the current package and the name of the variable, e.g. "main::$fh".  Under
recursion, the filehandle was losing the "$fh" part of the name.  This has been
fixed.

=item *

Perl 5.19.3 accidentally extended the previous bug to all closures, even when
not called recursively, i.e. lexical handles in closure would always be called
"main::" or "MyPackage::" etc.  This has been fixed.

=item *

Uninitialized values returned by XSUBs are no longer exempt from uninitialized
warnings.  [perl #118693]

=item *

C<elsif ("")> no longer erroneously produces a warning about void context.
[perl #118753]

=item *

Passing C<undef> to a subroutine now causes @_ to contain the same read-only
undefined scalar that C<undef> returns.  Furthermore, C<exists $_[0]> will now
return true if C<undef> was the first argument.  [perl #7508, #109726]

=item *

Passing a non-existent array element to a subroutine does not usually
autovivify it unless the subroutine modifies its argument.  This did not work
correctly with negative indices and with non-existent elements within the
array.  The element would be vivified immediately.  The delayed vivification
has been extended to work with those.  [perl #118691]

=item *

Assigning references or globs to the scalar returned by $#foo after the @foo
array has been freed no longer causes assertion failures on debugging builds
and memory leaks on regular builds.

=item *

Perl 5.19.2 threw line numbers off after some cases of line breaks following
keywords, such as

   1 unless
   1;

This has been fixed.  [perl #118931]

=item *

On 64-bit platforms, large ranges like 1..1000000000000 no longer crash, but
eat up all your memory instead.  [perl #119161]

=item *

C<__DATA__> now puts the C<DATA> handle in the right package, even if the
current package has been renamed through glob assignment.

=item *

The string position set by C<pos> could shift if the string changed
representation internally to or from utf8.  This could happen, e.g., with
references to objects with string overloading.

=item *

Taking references to the return values of two C<pos> calls with the same
argument, and then assigning a reference to one and C<undef> to the other,
could result in assertion failures or memory leaks.

=item *

Elements of @- and @+ now update correctly when they refer to non-existent
captures.  Previously, a referenced element (C<$ref = \$-[1]>) could refer to
the wrong match after subsequent matches.

=item *

When C<die>, C<last>, C<next>, C<redo>, C<goto> and C<exit> unwind the scope,
it is possible for C<DESTROY> recursively to call a subroutine or format that
is currently being exited.  It that case, sometimes the lexical variables
inside the sub would start out having values from the outer call, instead of
being undefined as they should.  This has been fixed.  [perl #119311]

=item *

${^MPEN} is no longer treated as a synonym for ${^MATCH}.

=item *

Perl now tries a little harder to return the correct line number in
C<(caller)[2]>.  [perl #115768]

=item *

Line numbers inside multiline quote-like operators are now reported correctly.
[perl #3643]

=item *

C<#line> directives inside code embedded in quote-like operators are now
respected.

=item *

Line numbers are now correct inside the second here-doc when two here-doc
markers occur on the same line.

=item *

Starting with Perl 5.12, line numbers were off by one if the B<-d> switch was
used on the #! line.  Now they are correct.

=item *

Perl 5.19.2 inadvertently stopped some lines of code from being available to
the debugger if C<=E<gt>> occurred at the beginning of a line and the previous
line ended with a keyword.  This is now fixed.

=item *

Perl 5.19.2 allowed the PERL5DB environment variable to contain multiple lines
of code, but those lines were not made available to the debugger.  Now they are
all stuffed into line number 0, accessible via C<$dbline[0]> in the debugger.

=item *

An optimization in Perl 5.18 made incorrect assumptions causing a bad
interaction with the L<Devel::CallParser> CPAN module.  If the module was
loaded then lexical variables declared in separate statements following a
C<my(...)> list might fail to be cleared on scope exit.

=item *

C<&xsub> and C<goto &xsub> calls now allow the called subroutine to autovivify
elements of @_.

=item *

C<&xsub> and C<goto &xsub> no longer crash if *_ has been undefined and has no
ARRAY entry (i.e. @_ does not exist).

=item *

C<&xsub> and C<goto &xsub> now work with tied @_.

=item *

Overlong identifiers no longer cause a buffer overflow (and a crash).  They
started doing so in Perl 5.18.

=item *

The warning "Scalar value @hash{foo} better written as $hash{foo}" now produces
far fewer false positives.  In particular, C<@hash{+function_returning_a_list}>
and C<@hash{ qw "foo bar baz" }> no longer warn.  The same applies to array
slices.  [perl #28380, #114024]

=item *

C<$! = EINVAL; waitpid(0, WNOHANG);> no longer goes into an internal infinite
loop.  [perl #85228]

=item *

Perl 5.19.3 accidentally caused C<\(1+2)> to return a reference to the same
mutable scalar each time, so that modifications affect future evaluations.
This has been fixed.  [perl #119501]

=item *

A possible segmentation fault in filehandle duplication has been fixed.

=item *

A subroutine in @INC can return a reference to a scalar containing the initial
contents of the file.  However, that scalar was freed prematurely if not
referenced elsewhere, giving random results.

=item *

C<last> no longer returns values that the same statement has accumulated so
far, fixing amongst other things the long-standing bug that C<push @a, last>
would try to return the @a, copying it like a scalar in the process and
resulting in the error, "Bizarre copy of ARRAY in last."  [perl #3112]

=item *

An optimization in Perl 5.18 made incorrect assumptions causing a bad
interaction with the L<Devel::CallParser> CPAN module.  This was partially
fixed in Perl 5.19.4, but the fix was not sufficient and another fault has now
been corrected.

=item *

In some cases, closing file handles opened to pipe to or from a process, which
had been duplicated into a standard handle, would call perl's internal waitpid
wrapper with a pid of zero.  With the fix for [perl #85228] this zero pid was
passed to C<waitpid>, possibly blocking the process.  This wait for process
zero no longer occurs.  [perl #119893]

=item *

The code that parses regex backrefs (or ambiguous backref/octals) such as \123
did a simple atoi(), which could wrap round to negative values on long digit
strings and cause segmentation faults.  This has now been fixed.  [perl
#119505]

=item *

C<select> used to ignore magic on the fourth (timeout) argument, leading to
effects such as C<select> blocking indefinitely rather than the expected sleep
time.  This has now been fixed.  [perl #120102]

=item *

The class name in C<for my class $foo> is now parsed correctly.  In the case of
the second character of the class name being followed by a digit (e.g. 'a1b')
this used to give the error "Missing $ on loop variable".  [perl #120112]

=back

=head1 Known Problems

XXX Descriptions of platform agnostic bugs we know we can't fix go here.  Any
tests that had to be C<TODO>ed for the release would be noted here.  Unfixed
platform specific bugs also go here.

[ List each fix as a =item entry ]

=over 4

=item *

The following modules are known to have test failures with this version of
Perl.  Patches have been submitted, so there will hopefully be new releases
soon:

XXX Go through this list just before the release of 5.20 and remove any
modules that have been fixed.

=over

=item *

L<Data::Structure::Util> version 0.15

=item *

L<Data::Util> version 0.62

=item *

L<HTML::FormHandler>.  The test failures are actually due to a bug in
L<Data::Clone> version 0.003.  A patch to Data::Clone has been submitted.

=item *

L<HTML::StripScripts> version 1.05

=item *

L<LaTeX::Encode> version 0.08

=item

L<Mail::SpamAssassin> version 3.3.2

=item *

L<RDF::Trine>.  The test failures are actually due to a bug in
L<XML::LibXML> version 2.0108.  A patch to XML::LibXML has been submitted.

=back

=back

=head1 Obituary

XXX If any significant core contributor has died, we've added a short obituary
here.

=head1 Acknowledgements

XXX Generate this with:

  perl Porting/acknowledgements.pl v5.19.12..HEAD

=head1 Reporting Bugs

If you find what you think is a bug, you might check the articles recently
posted to the comp.lang.perl.misc newsgroup and the perl bug database at
http://rt.perl.org/perlbug/ .  There may also be information at
http://www.perl.org/ , the Perl Home Page.

If you believe you have an unreported bug, please run the L<perlbug> program
included with your release.  Be sure to trim your bug down to a tiny but
sufficient test case.  Your bug report, along with the output of C<perl -V>,
will be sent off to perlbug@perl.org to be analysed by the Perl porting team.

If the bug you are reporting has security implications, which make it
inappropriate to send to a publicly archived mailing list, then please send it
to perl5-security-report@perl.org.  This points to a closed subscription
unarchived mailing list, which includes all the core committers, who will be
able to help assess the impact of issues, figure out a resolution, and help
co-ordinate the release of patches to mitigate or fix the problem across all
platforms on which Perl is supported.  Please only use this address for
security issues in the Perl core, not for modules independently distributed on
CPAN.

=head1 SEE ALSO

The F<Changes> file for an explanation of how to view exhaustive details on
what changed.

The F<INSTALL> file for how to build Perl.

The F<README> file for general stuff.

The F<Artistic> and F<Copying> files for copyright information.

=cut
