.rn '' }`
''' $Header: perldb.man,v 1.0.1.1 88/01/28 10:28:19 root Exp $
''' 
''' $Log:	perldb.man,v $
''' Revision 1.0.1.1  88/01/28  10:28:19  root
''' patch8: created this file.
''' 
''' 
.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(bs-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(bs-
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(bs\h'-12u'\(bs\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(bs\h'-12u'\(bs\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
'br\}
.TH PERLDB 1 LOCAL
.SH NAME
perldb - Perl Debugger
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B perldb [-o output] perlscript arguments
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Perldb
is a symbolic debugger for
.I perl
scripts.
Run your script just as you normally would, only prepend \*(L"perldb\*(R" to
the command.
(On systems where #! doesn't work, put any perl switches into the #! line
anyway\*(--perldb will pass them off to perl when it runs the script.)
Perldb copies your script to a temporary file, instrumenting it in the process
and adding a debugging monitor.
It then executes the instrumented script for
you and stops at the first statement so you can set any breakpoints or actions
you desire.
.PP
There is only one switch: \-o, which tells perldb to put its temporary file
in the filename you specify, and to refrain from deleting the file.
Use this switch if you intend to rerun the instrumented script, or want to
look at it for some reason.
.PP
These are the debugging commands:
.Ip s 8
Single step.
Subsequent carriage returns will single step.
.Ip c 8
Continue.
Turns off single step mode and runs till the next break point.
Subsequent carriage returns will continue.
.Ip <CR> 8
Repeat last s or c.
.Ip "l min-max" 8
List lines in the indicated range.
.Ip "l line" 8
List indicated line.
.Ip l 8
List the whole program.
.Ip L 8
List breakpoints.
.Ip t 8
Toggle trace mode.
.Ip "b line" 8
Set breakpoint at indicated line.
.Ip "d line" 8
Delete breakpoint at indicated line.
.Ip d 8
Delete breakpoint at this line.
.Ip "a line command" 8
Set an action for indicated line.
The command must be a valid perl command, except that a missing trailing ;
will be supplied.
.Ip q 8
Quit.
.Ip command 8
Execute command as a perl statement.
A missing trailing ; will be supplied if necessary.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
No environment variables are used by perldb.
.SH AUTHOR
Larry Wall <lwall@jpl-devvax.Jpl.Nasa.Gov>
.SH FILES
/tmp/pdb$$	temporary file for instrumented script
.SH SEE ALSO
perl	
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.SH BUGS
.rn }` ''
