=head1 NAME

Test::Stream::Architecture - Overview of how the Test-More dist works.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is the document that explains the architecture of Test::More and all the
stuff driving it under the hood.

=head1 KEY COMPONTENTS

This is the list of primary components and their brief description, The most
critical ones will have more details in later sections.

=over 4

=item Test::More

=item Test::Simple

These are the primary public interfaces for anyone who wishes to write tests.

=item Test::More::Tools

All of the tools Test::More provides have been relocated and refactored into
Test::More::Tools in such a way as to make them generic and reusable. This
means you can use them without firing off events, you can then fire off your
own events compiled from multiple tools. In many cases this is what tool
builders actually want, but instead they settle for bumping C<$Level> and
calling is/like/ok and producing extra events.

=item Test::Builder

This B<used> to be the main under the hood module for anyone who wished to
write a L<Test::More> compatible test library. It still works, and should be
fully functional and backwards compatible. It is however discouraged as it is
mostly a compatability wrapper.

=item Test::Stream

This is the B<new> heart and soul of the Test::* architecture. However it is
not the primary interface. This module is responsible for collecting all events
from all threads and processes, then forwarding them to TAP and any added
listeners.

=item Test::Stream::IOSets

This module is used to manage the IO handles to which all TAP is sent.
Test::Builder cloned STDERR and STDOUT, then applied various magic to them.
This module provides that legacy support while also adding support for utf8 and
other encodings. By default all TAP goes to the 'legacy' outputs, which mimick
what Test::Builder has always done. The 'legacy' outputs are also what get
altered if someone uses the Test::Builder->output interface.

=item Test::Stream::Toolset

This is the primary interface a test module author should use. It ties together
some key functions you should use. It proved 3 critical functions:

    is_tester($package)

    init_tester($package)

    my $ctx = context();

=item Test::Stream::Context

This is the primary interface as far as generating events goes. Every test
function should grab a context, and use it to generate events.

Once a context object is created (the normal way) it is remembered, and
anything that requests a context object will obtain the same instance. However
once the instance is destroyed (end of your test function) it is forgotten, the
next test function to run will then obtain a new context instance.

=item Test::Stream::Event

=item Test::Stream::Event::Ok

=item Test::Stream::Event::Diag

=item Test::Stream::Event::Note

=item Test::Stream::Event::*

All events generated by Test::More and other test tools now boil down to a
proper object. All events must use Test::Stream::Event as a base.

=item Test::Stream::ArrayBase

This is the L<Moose> of Test::Stream. It is responsible for generating
accessors and similar work. Unlike moose and others it uses an arrayref as the
underlying object. This design descision was made to improve performance.
Performance was a real problem in some early alphas, the gains from the
descision are huge.

=item Test::Stream::Tester

This is actually what spawned the ideas for the new Test::Stream work. This is
a module that lets you validate your testing tools.

=back

=head1 THE STREAM OBJECT

=over 4

=item L<Test::Stream>

=back

=head2 HISTORY

L<Test::Builder> is/was a singleton. The singleton model was chosen to solve
the problem of synchronizing everything to a central location. Ultimately all
results need to make their way to a central place that can assign them a
number, and shove them through the correct output.

The singleton model proved to be a major headache.

Intercepting events typically meant replacing the singleton perminantly
(Test::Tester) or for a limited scope. Another option people took
(Test::Builder::Tester) was to simply replace the IO handles Test::Builder was
tracking.

Test::Builder did not provide any real mechanisms for altering events before
processing them, or for intercepting them before they were turned into TAP. As
a result many modules have monkeypatched Test::Builder, particularily the
C<ok()> method.

=head2 CURRENT DESIGN

Test::Stream unfortunately must still act as a singleton (mostly). But this
time the design was to put as little as possible into the singleton.

=head3 RESPONSIBILITIES OF TEST::STREAM

Test::Stream has 4 main jobs:

=over 4

=item Collect events from all threads and processes into 1 place

    $stream->send($event);

The send() method will ensure that the event gets to the right place, no matter
what thread or process you are in. (Forking support must be turned on, it is
off by default).

B<Note:> This method is key to performance. This method and everything it calls
must remain as lean and tight as possible.

=item Provide a pre-output hook for altering events

    $stream->munge(sub { my ($stream, $event) = @_; ... })

This lets you modify events before they are turned into output. You cannot
remove the event, nor can you add events. Mungers are additive, and proceessed
in the order they are added.

There is not currently any way to remove a munger.

B<Note:> each munger is called in a loop in the C<send()> method, so keep it is
fast and small as possible.

=item Forward all events to listeners (including TAP output)

    $stream->listen(sub { my ($stream, $event) = @_; .... })

This lets you add a listener. All events that come to the stream object will be
sent to all listeners.

There is not currently any way to remove a listener.

B<Note:> each listener is called in a loop in the C<send()> method, so keep it is
fast and small as possible.

=item Maintaining the legacy exit behavior from Test::Builder

This is primarily setting $? to the number of tests that failed, up to 255, as
well as providing other output such as missing a plan.

=back

=head3 SEMI-SINGLETON MODEL

Test::Stream has a semi-singleton model. Instead of 1 singleton, it is a
singleton stack. Anything that wants to send an event to the B<current> acting
stream should send it to the stream returned by C<< Test::Stream->shared >>.
Nothing should ever cache this result as the B<current> stream may change.

This mechanism is primarily used for intercepting, and hiding, all events for a
limited scope. L<Test::Stream::Tester> uses this to push a stream onto the stack so
that you can generate events that do not go to the listeners or TAP. Once the
stack is popped the previous stream is restored allowing you to generate real
events.

You can also create new Test::Stream objects at-will that are not present in
the stack, this lets you create alternate streams for any purpose you want.

=head1 THE CONTEXT OBJECT

=over 4

=item L<Test::Stream::Context>

=back

This module is responsbile for 2 things, knowing where to report errors, and
making it easy to issue events.

=head2 ERROR REPORTING

To get the context you use the C<context()> function.

    sub ok {
        my $context = context();
        ...
    }

    ok() # Errors are reported here.

If there is a context already in play, that instance will be returned.
Otherwise a new context will be returned. The context assumes that the stack
level just above your call is where errors should be reported.

You can optionally provide an integer as the only argument, in whcih case that
number will be added to the C<caller()> call to find the correct frame for
reporting. This will be completely ignored if there is already an active
context.

    sub ok {
        my $context = context();
        ...
    }

    sub my_ok {
        my $context = context();
        ok(...);
    }

    my_ok();

In the example above c<my_ok()> generates a new context, then it calls C<ok()>,
in this case both function will have the same context object, the one generated
by my_ok. The result is that C<ok> will report errors to the correct place.

=head3 IMPLEMENTEATION

There is a variable C<$CURRENT> in C<Test::Stream::Context>, it is a lexical,
so you can not touch it directly. When the C<context()> function is called, it
first checks if $CURRENT is set, if so it returns that. If there is no current
context it generates a new one.

When a new context is generated, it is assigned to C<$CURRENT>, but then the
reference is weakened. This means that once the returned copy falls out of
scope, or is otherwise removed, C<$CURRENT> will vanish on its own. This means
that so long as you hold on to your context object, anything you call will find
it.

B<The caveat> here is that if you descide to hold on to your context beyond
your scope, you could sabatoge any future test functions. If you need to hold
on to a context you need to call C<< $context->snapshot >>, and store the
cloned object it returns. In general you should not need to do this, event
objects all store the context, but do so using a snapshot.

B<Note> I am open to changing this to remove the weak-reference magic and
instead require someone to call C<< $context->release >> or similar when they
are done with a context, but that seams more likely to result in rougue
contexts... This method would also require its own form of reference counting..
This descision will need to be made before we go stable.

=head2 GENERATING EVENTS

All event objects should use L<Test::Stream::Event> which will set them up as a
proper event object, as well as add a method to L<Test::Stream::Context> which
is a shortcut for generating that event type. As such you can fire off an event
directly from your context object using the lowercase name of the event class.

    my $ctx = context;
    $ctx->ok(1, "pass");
    $ctx->ok(0, "fail, ["This test failed, here is some diag ..."]);
    $ctx->note("I am a teapot");

All events take a context, and 2 other arguments as the first 3 arguments of
their constructor, these shortcut methods handle those first 3 arguments for
you, making life much easier.

The other arguments are:

=over 4

=item created

Should be an arrayref with caller information for where the event was generated.

=item in_subtest

True if the event belongs in a subtest, false otherwise.

=back

=head1 EVENT OBJECTS

Here are the primary/public events. There are other events, but they are used
internally.

=over 4

=item L<Test::Stream::Event>

This is just a base-class, you do not use it directly.

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Diag>

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Note>

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Plan>

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Bail>

These are faily simple and obvious event types.

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Ok>

=item L<Test::Stream::Event::Subtest>

B<Note:> C<Subtest> is a subclass of C<Ok>.

Ok can contain diag objects related to that specific ok. Subtest contains all
the events that went into the final subtest result.

=back

All events have a context in which they were created, which includes the file
and line number where errors should be reported. They also have details on
where/how they were generated. All other details are event specific.

The subclass event should never be generated on its own. In fact, just use the
subtest helpers provided by Test::More, or Test::Stream::Context. Under the
hood a Child event is started which adds a subtest to a stack in Test::Stream,
all events then get intercepted by that subtest. When the subtest is done you
issue another Child event to close it out. Once closed a Subtest event will be
generated for you and sent to the stream.

=encoding utf8

=head1 SOURCE

The source code repository for Test::More can be found at
F<http://github.com/Test-More/test-more/>.

=head1 MAINTAINER

=over 4

=item Chad Granum E<lt>exodist@cpan.orgE<gt>

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

The following people have all contributed to the Test-More dist (sorted using
VIM's sort function).

=over 4

=item Chad Granum E<lt>exodist@cpan.orgE<gt>

=item Fergal Daly E<lt>fergal@esatclear.ie>E<gt>

=item Mark Fowler E<lt>mark@twoshortplanks.comE<gt>

=item Michael G Schwern E<lt>schwern@pobox.comE<gt>

=item 唐鳳

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

There has been a lot of code migration between modules,
here are all the original copyrights together:

=over 4

=item Test::Stream

=item Test::Stream::Tester

Copyright 2014 Chad Granum E<lt>exodist7@gmail.comE<gt>.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

See F<http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html>

=item Test::Simple

=item Test::More

=item Test::Builder

Originally authored by Michael G Schwern E<lt>schwern@pobox.comE<gt> with much
inspiration from Joshua Pritikin's Test module and lots of help from Barrie
Slaymaker, Tony Bowden, blackstar.co.uk, chromatic, Fergal Daly and the perl-qa
gang.

Idea by Tony Bowden and Paul Johnson, code by Michael G Schwern
E<lt>schwern@pobox.comE<gt>, wardrobe by Calvin Klein.

Copyright 2001-2008 by Michael G Schwern E<lt>schwern@pobox.comE<gt>.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

See F<http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html>

=item Test::use::ok

To the extent possible under law, 唐鳳 has waived all copyright and related
or neighboring rights to L<Test-use-ok>.

This work is published from Taiwan.

L<http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0>

=item Test::Tester

This module is copyright 2005 Fergal Daly <fergal@esatclear.ie>, some parts
are based on other people's work.

Under the same license as Perl itself

See http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html

=item Test::Builder::Tester

Copyright Mark Fowler E<lt>mark@twoshortplanks.comE<gt> 2002, 2004.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=back
