5.023008
blk_oldsaveix                  # Z added by devel/scanprov
blk_old_tmpsfloor              # Z added by devel/scanprov
clear_defarray                 # U
CX_CUR                         # Z added by devel/scanprov
CX_DEBUG                       # Z added by devel/scanprov
CX_LEAVE_SCOPE                 # Z added by devel/scanprov
CXp_FOR_GV                     # Z added by devel/scanprov
CXp_FOR_PAD                    # Z added by devel/scanprov
CX_POP                         # Z added by devel/scanprov
cx_popblock                    # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_popeval                     # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_popformat                   # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_poploop                     # F added by devel/scanprov
CX_POP_SAVEARRAY               # Z added by devel/scanprov
cx_popsub                      # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_popsub_args                 # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_popsub_common               # F added by devel/scanprov
CX_POPSUBST                    # Z added by devel/scanprov
cx_pushblock                   # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_pusheval                    # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_pushformat                  # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_pushloop_for                # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_pushloop_plain              # F added by devel/scanprov
cx_pushsub                     # F added by devel/scanprov
CX_PUSHSUB_GET_LVALUE_MASK     # Z added by devel/scanprov
CX_PUSHSUBST                   # Z added by devel/scanprov
CXt_LOOP_ARY                   # Z added by devel/scanprov
CXt_LOOP_LIST                  # Z added by devel/scanprov
cx_topblock                    # F added by devel/scanprov
doeval_compile                 # F added by devel/scanprov
edit_distance                  # F added by devel/scanprov
handle_named_backref           # F added by devel/scanprov
handle_possible_posix          # F added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_ADDR            # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_BAND            # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_ERRNO           # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_PID             # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_STATUS          # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_UID             # K added by devel/scanprov
HAS_SIGINFO_SI_VALUE           # K added by devel/scanprov
invlist_contents               # F added by devel/scanprov
leave_adjust_stacks            # U
PERL_BISON_VERSION             # Z added by devel/scanprov
Perl_savetmps                  # U
PL_dump_re_max_len             # Z added by devel/scanprov
put_charclass_bitmap_innards_common # F added by devel/scanprov
put_charclass_bitmap_innards_invlist # F added by devel/scanprov
SAVEt_TMPSFLOOR                # Z added by devel/scanprov
SET_SVANY_FOR_BODYLESS_IV      # Z added by devel/scanprov
SET_SVANY_FOR_BODYLESS_NV      # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_BREAKABLE                   # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_DQ_then_HL                  # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_HL_then_DQ                  # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_hs_then_hs                  # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_LE_or_HL_then_MB_or_ML_or_SQ # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_MB_or_ML_or_SQ_then_LE_or_HL # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_MB_or_MN_or_SQ_then_NU      # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_NOBREAK                     # Z added by devel/scanprov
WB_NU_then_MB_or_MN_or_SQ      # Z added by devel/scanprov
