README for I18N::LangTags
                                        Time-stamp: "2004-10-06 23:19:39 ADT"

			    I18N::LangTags

I18N::LangTags - functions for dealing with RFC3066-style language
tags

Language tags are a formalism, described in RFC 3066 (obsoleting
1766), for declaring what language form (language and possibly
dialect) a given chunk of information is in.

This library provides functions for common tasks involving language
tags (notably the extraction of them, comparing them, and testing the
formal validity of them) as is needed in a variety of protocols and
applications.


I18N::LangTags::List -- tags and names for human languages.  This
module goes from known language tag names ("fr-CA") to their English
names ("Canadian French").  Its documentation also lists the several
hundred known tags and some common subforms.  You may find this useful
as a reference.


See the POD for more information.


INSTALLATION

You install I18N::LangTags and I18N::LangTags::List, as you would
install any perl module library, by running these commands:

   perl Makefile.PL
   make
   make test
   make install

If you want to install a private copy of I18N::LangTags in your home
directory, then you should try to produce the initial Makefile with
something like this command:

  perl Makefile.PL LIB=~/perl

See perldoc perlmodinstall for more information on installing modules.


DOCUMENTATION

POD-format documentation is included in LangTags.pm.  POD is readable
with the 'perldoc' utility.  See ChangeLog for recent changes.


SUPPORT

Questions, bug reports, useful code bits, and suggestions for
I18N::LangTags should just be sent to me at sburke@cpan.org


AVAILABILITY

The latest version of I18N::LangTags is available from the
Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN).  Visit
<http://www.perl.com/CPAN/> to find a CPAN site near you.


COPYRIGHT

Copyright 1998+, Sean M. Burke <sburke@cpan.org>, all rights
reserved.

The programs and documentation in this dist are distributed in
the hope that they will be useful, but without any warranty; without
even the implied warranty of merchantability or fitness for a
particular purpose.

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the same terms as Perl itself.
