=head1 NAME

I18n::LangTags::List -- list of tags for human languages

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  Time-stamp: "2001-05-27 19:55:19 MDT"
  [This is not a module; it is documentation]

=head1 ABOUT LANGUAGE TAGS

Internet language tags, as defined in RFC 3066, are a formalism
for denoting human languages.  The two-letter ISO 639-1 language
codes are well known (as "en" for English), as are their forms
when qualified by a country code ("en-US").  Less well-known are the
arbitrary-length non-ISO codes (like "i-mingo"), and the 
recently (in 2001) introduced three-letter ISO-639-2 codes.

Remember this important facts:

=over

=item *

Language tags are not locale IDs.  A locale ID is written with a "_"
instead of a "-", (almost?) always matches C<m/^\w\w_\w\w\b/>, and
I<means> something different than a language tag.  A language tag
denotes a language.  A locale ID denotes a language I<as used in>
a particular place, in combination with non-linguistic
location-specific information such as what currency in used
there.  Locales I<also> often denote character set information,
as in "en_US.ISO8859-1".

=item *

Language tags are not for computer languages.

=item *

"Dialect" is not a useful term, since there is no objective
criterion for establishing when two languages are
dialects of eachother, or are separate languages.

=item *

Language tags are not case-sensitive.  en-US, en-us, En-Us, etc.,
are all the same tag, and denote the same language.

=item *

Not every language tag really refers to a single language.  Some
language tags refer to conditions: i-default (system-message text
in English plus maybe other languages), und (undetermined
language).  Others (notably lots of the three-letter codes) are
bibliographic tags that classify whole groups of languages, as
with cus "Cushitic (Other)" (i.e., a
language that has been classed as Cushtic, but which has no more
specific code) or the even less linguistically coherent
sai for "South American Indian (Other)".  While useful in
bibliography, B<SUCH TAGS ARE NOT
FOR GENERAL USE>.  For further guidance, email me.

=item *

Language tags are not country codes.  In fact, they are often
distinct codes, as with language tag ja for Japanese, and
ISO 3166 country code C<.jp> for Japan.

=back

=head1 LIST OF LANGUAGES

The first part of each item is the language tag, between
{...} and in italic characters.  It
is followed by an English name for the language or language-group.
Language tags that I judge to be not for general use, are bracketed.

This list is in alphabetical order by English name of the language.

=over

=item I<{ab}> : Abkhazian

eq Abkhaz

=item I<{ace}> : Achinese

=item I<{ach}> : Acoli

=item I<{ada}> : Adangme

=item I<{aa}> : Afar

=item I<{afh}> : Afrihili

(Artificial)

=item I<{af}> : Afrikaans

=item [I<{afa}> : Afro-Asiatic (Other)]

=item I<{aka}> : Akan

=item I<{akk}> : Akkadian

(Historical)

=item I<{sq}> : Albanian

=item I<{ale}> : Aleut

=item [I<{alg}> : Algonquian languages]

NOT Algonquin!

=item [I<{tut}> : Altaic (Other)]

=item I<{am}> : Amharic

NOT Aramaic!

=item I<{i-ami}> : Ami

eq Amis.  eq 'Amis.  eq Pangca.

=item [I<{apa}> : Apache languages]

=item I<{ar}> : Arabic

Many forms are mutually un-intelligible in spoken media.
Notable forms:
ar-ae
ar-bh
ar-dz
ar-eg
ar-iq
ar-jo
ar-kw
ar-lb
ar-ly
ar-ma
ar-om
ar-qa
ar-sa
ar-sy
ar-tn
ar-ye.

=item I<{arc}> : Aramaic

NOT Amharic!  NOT Samaritan Aramaic!

=item I<{arp}> : Arapaho

=item I<{arn}> : Araucanian

=item I<{arw}> : Arawak

=item I<{hy}> : Armenian

=item [I<{art}> : Artificial (Other)]

=item I<{as}> : Assamese

=item [I<{ath}> : Athapascan languages]

eq Athabaskan.  eq Athapaskan.  eq Athabascan.

=item [I<{aus}> : Australian languages]

=item [I<{map}> : Austronesian (Other)]

=item I<{ava}> : Avaric

=item I<{ae}> : Avestan

eq Zend

=item I<{awa}> : Awadhi

=item I<{ay}> : Aymara

=item I<{az}> : Azerbaijani

eq Azeri

=item I<{ban}> : Balinese

=item [I<{bat}> : Baltic (Other)]

=item I<{bal}> : Baluchi

=item I<{bam}> : Bambara

=item [I<{bai}> : Bamileke languages]

=item I<{bad}> : Banda

=item [I<{bnt}> : Bantu (Other)]

=item I<{bas}> : Basa

=item I<{ba}> : Bashkir

=item I<{eu}> : Basque

=item I<{btk}> : Batak (Indonesia)

=item I<{bej}> : Beja

=item I<{be}> : Belarusian

eq Belarussian.  eq Byelarussian.
eq Belorussian.  eq Byelorussian.
eq White Russian.  eq White Ruthenian.
NOT Ruthenian!

=item I<{bem}> : Bemba

=item I<{bn}> : Bengali

=item [I<{ber}> : Berber (Other)]

=item I<{bho}> : Bhojpuri

=item I<{bh}> : Bihari

=item I<{bik}> : Bikol

=item I<{bin}> : Bini

=item I<{bi}> : Bislama

=item I<{bs}> : Bosnian

=item I<{bra}> : Braj

=item I<{br}> : Breton

=item I<{bug}> : Buginese

=item I<{bg}> : Bulgarian

=item I<{i-bnn}> : Bunun

=item I<{bua}> : Buriat

=item I<{my}> : Burmese

=item I<{cad}> : Caddo

=item I<{car}> : Carib

=item I<{ca}> : Catalan

eq CatalE<aacute>n.  eq Catalonian.

=item [I<{cau}> : Caucasian (Other)]

=item I<{ceb}> : Cebuano

=item [I<{cel}> : Celtic (Other)]

Notable forms: cel-gaulish.

=item [I<{cai}> : Central American Indian (Other)]

=item I<{chg}> : Chagatai

(Historical?)

=item [I<{cmc}> : Chamic languages]

=item I<{ch}> : Chamorro

=item I<{ce}> : Chechen

=item I<{chr}> : Cherokee

eq Tsalagi

=item I<{chy}> : Cheyenne

=item I<{chb}> : Chibcha

(Historical)  NOT Chibchan (which is a language family).

=item I<{ny}> : Chichewa

eq Nyanja.  eq Chinyanja.

=item I<{zh}> : Chinese

Many forms are mutually un-intelligible in spoken media.
Notable subforms:
zh-cn (PRC Chinese),
zh-hk (Hong Kong Chinese),
zh-mo (Macau Chinese), 
zh-sg (Singapore Chinese),
zh-tw (Taiwan Chinese),
zh-guoyu (Putonghua/Guoyu/Mandarin),
zh-hakka (Hakka; formerly i-hakka),
zh-min (Hokkien),
zh-min-nan (Southern Hokkien),
zh-wuu (Shanghaiese),
zh-xiang (Hunanese),
zh-yue (Cantonese).

=item I<{chn}> : Chinook Jargon

eq Chinook Wawa.

=item I<{chp}> : Chipewyan

=item I<{cho}> : Choctaw

=item I<{cu}> : Church Slavic

eq Old Church Slavonic.

=item I<{chk}> : Chuukese

eq Trukese.  eq Chuuk.  eq Truk.  eq Ruk.

=item I<{cv}> : Chuvash

=item I<{cop}> : Coptic

=item I<{kw}> : Cornish

=item I<{co}> : Corsican

eq Corse.

=item I<{cre}> : Cree

NOT Creek!

=item I<{mus}> : Creek

NOT Cree!

=item [I<{cpe}> : English-based Creoles and pidgins (Other)]

=item [I<{cpf}> : French-based Creoles and pidgins (Other)]

=item [I<{cpp}> : Portuguese-based Creoles and pidgins (Other)]

=item [I<{crp}> : Creoles and pidgins (Other)]

=item I<{hr}> : Croatian

eq Croat.

=item [I<{cus}> : Cushitic (Other)]

=item I<{cs}> : Czech

=item I<{dak}> : Dakota

eq Nakota.  eq Latoka.

=item I<{da}> : Danish

=item I<{day}> : Dayak

=item I<{i-default}> : Default (Fallthru) Language

Defined in RFC 2277, this is for tagging text
(which must include English text, and might/should include text
in other appropriate languages) that is emitted in a context
where language-negotiation wasn't possible -- in SMTP mail failure
messages, for example.

=item I<{del}> : Delaware

=item I<{din}> : Dinka

=item I<{div}> : Divehi

=item I<{doi}> : Dogri

NOT Dogrib!

=item I<{dgr}> : Dogrib

NOT Dogri!

=item [I<{dra}> : Dravidian (Other)]

=item I<{dua}> : Duala

=item I<{nl}> : Dutch

eq Netherlander.  Notable forms: nl-nl, nl-be.

=item I<{dum}> : Middle Dutch (ca.1050-1350)

(Historical)

=item I<{dyu}> : Dyula

=item I<{dz}> : Dzongkha

=item I<{efi}> : Efik

=item I<{egy}> : Ancient Egyptian

(Historical)

=item I<{eka}> : Ekajuk

=item I<{elx}> : Elamite

(Historical)

=item I<{en}> : English

Notable forms:
en-au
en-bz
en-ca
en-gb
en-ie
en-jm
en-nz
en-ph
en-tt
en-us
en-za
en-zw.

=item I<{enm}> : Old English (1100-1500)

(Historical)

=item I<{ang}> : Old English (ca.450-1100)

eq Anglo-Saxon.  (Historical)

=item I<{eo}> : Esperanto

(Artificial)

=item I<{et}> : Estonian

=item I<{ewe}> : Ewe

=item I<{ewo}> : Ewondo

=item I<{fan}> : Fang

=item I<{fat}> : Fanti

=item I<{fo}> : Faroese

=item I<{fj}> : Fijian

=item I<{fi}> : Finnish

=item [I<{fiu}> : Finno-Ugrian (Other)]

eq Finno-Ugric.  NOT Ugaritic!

=item I<{fon}> : Fon

=item I<{fr}> : French

Notable forms:
fr-fr
fr-be
fr-ca
fr-ch
fr-lu
fr-mc.

=item I<{frm}> : Middle French (ca.1400-1600)

(Historical)

=item I<{fro}> : Old French (842-ca.1400)

(Historical)

=item I<{fy}> : Frisian

=item I<{fur}> : Friulian

=item I<{ful}> : Fulah

=item I<{gaa}> : Ga

=item I<{gd}> : Scots Gaelic

NOT Scots!

=item I<{gl}> : Gallegan

eq Galician

=item I<{lug}> : Ganda

=item I<{gay}> : Gayo

=item I<{gba}> : Gbaya

=item I<{gez}> : Geez

eq Ge'ez

=item I<{ka}> : Georgian

=item I<{de}> : German

Notable forms: de-at
de-be
de-ch
de-de
de-li
de-lu.

=item I<{gmh}> : Middle High German (ca.1050-1500)

(Historical)

=item I<{goh}> : Old High German (ca.750-1050)

(Historical)

=item [I<{gem}> : Germanic (Other)]

=item I<{gil}> : Gilbertese

=item I<{gon}> : Gondi

=item I<{gor}> : Gorontalo

=item I<{got}> : Gothic

(Historical)

=item I<{grb}> : Grebo

=item I<{grc}> : Ancient Greek (to 1453)

(Historical)

=item I<{el}> : Modern Greek (1453-)

=item I<{gn}> : Guarani

GuaranE<iacute>

=item I<{gu}> : Gujarati

=item I<{gwi}> : Gwich'in

eq Gwichin

=item I<{hai}> : Haida

=item I<{ha}> : Hausa

=item I<{haw}> : Hawaiian

Hawai'ian

=item I<{he}> : Hebrew

(Formerly "iw".)

=item I<{hz}> : Herero

=item I<{hil}> : Hiligaynon

=item I<{him}> : Himachali

=item I<{hi}> : Hindi

=item I<{ho}> : Hiri Motu

=item I<{hit}> : Hittite

(Historical)

=item I<{hmn}> : Hmong

=item I<{hu}> : Hungarian

=item I<{hup}> : Hupa

=item I<{iba}> : Iban

=item I<{is}> : Icelandic

=item I<{ibo}> : Igbo

=item I<{ijo}> : Ijo

=item I<{ilo}> : Iloko

=item [I<{inc}> : Indic (Other)]

=item [I<{ine}> : Indo-European (Other)]

=item I<{id}> : Indonesian

(Formerly "in".)

=item I<{ia}> : Interlingua (International Auxiliary Language Association)

(Artificial)  NOT Interlingue!

=item I<{ie}> : Interlingue

(Artificial)  NOT Interlingua!

=item I<{iu}> : Inuktitut

A subform of "Eskimo".

=item I<{ik}> : Inupiaq

A subform of "Eskimo".

=item [I<{ira}> : Iranian (Other)]

=item I<{ga}> : Irish

=item I<{mga}> : Middle Irish (900-1200)

(Historical)

=item I<{sga}> : Old Irish (to 900)

(Historical)

=item [I<{iro}> : Iroquoian languages]

=item I<{it}> : Italian

Notable forms: it-it, it-ch

=item I<{ja}> : Japanese

(NOT "jp"!)

=item I<{jw}> : Javanese

=item I<{jrb}> : Judeo-Arabic

=item I<{jpr}> : Judeo-Persian

=item I<{kab}> : Kabyle

=item I<{kac}> : Kachin

=item I<{kl}> : Kalaallisut

eq Greenlandic "Eskimo"

=item I<{kam}> : Kamba

=item I<{kn}> : Kannada

NOT Canadian!

=item I<{kau}> : Kanuri

=item I<{kaa}> : Kara-Kalpak

=item I<{kar}> : Karen

=item I<{ks}> : Kashmiri

=item I<{kaw}> : Kawi

=item I<{kk}> : Kazakh

=item I<{kha}> : Khasi

=item I<{km}> : Khmer

eq Cambodian.  eq Kampuchean.

=item [I<{khi}> : Khoisan (Other)]

=item I<{kho}> : Khotanese

=item I<{ki}> : Kikuyu

eq Gikuyu.

=item I<{kmb}> : Kimbundu

=item I<{rw}> : Kinyarwanda

=item I<{ky}> : Kirghiz

=item I<{i-klingon}> : Klingon

=item I<{kv}> : Komi

=item I<{kon}> : Kongo

=item I<{kok}> : Konkani

=item I<{ko}> : Korean

=item I<{kos}> : Kosraean

=item I<{kpe}> : Kpelle

=item I<{kro}> : Kru

=item I<{kj}> : Kuanyama

=item I<{kum}> : Kumyk

=item I<{ku}> : Kurdish

=item I<{kru}> : Kurukh

=item I<{kut}> : Kutenai

=item I<{lad}> : Ladino

eq Judeo-Spanish.  NOT Ladin (a minority language in Italy).

=item I<{lah}> : Lahnda

NOT Lamba!

=item I<{lam}> : Lamba

NOT Lahnda!

=item I<{lo}> : Lao

=item I<{la}> : Latin

(Historical)  NOT Ladin!  NOT Ladino!

=item I<{lv}> : Latvian

eq Lettish.

=item I<{lb}> : Letzeburgesch

eq Luxemburgian, eq Luxemburger.  (Formerly i-lux.)

=item I<{lez}> : Lezghian

=item I<{ln}> : Lingala

=item I<{lt}> : Lithuanian

=item I<{nds}> : Low German

eq Low Saxon.  eq Low German.  eq Low Saxon.

=item I<{loz}> : Lozi

=item I<{lub}> : Luba-Katanga

=item I<{lua}> : Luba-Lulua

=item I<{lui}> : Luiseno

eq LuiseE<ntilde>o.

=item I<{lun}> : Lunda

=item I<{luo}> : Luo (Kenya and Tanzania)

=item I<{lus}> : Lushai

=item I<{mk}> : Macedonian

eq the modern Slavic language spoken in what was Yugoslavia.
NOT the form of Greek spoken in Greek Macedonia!

=item I<{mad}> : Madurese

=item I<{mag}> : Magahi

=item I<{mai}> : Maithili

=item I<{mak}> : Makasar

=item I<{mg}> : Malagasy

=item I<{ms}> : Malay

NOT Malayalam!

=item I<{ml}> : Malayalam

NOT Malay!

=item I<{mt}> : Maltese

=item I<{mnc}> : Manchu

=item I<{mdr}> : Mandar

NOT Mandarin!

=item I<{man}> : Mandingo

=item I<{mni}> : Manipuri

=item [I<{mno}> : Manobo languages]

=item I<{gv}> : Manx

=item I<{mi}> : Maori

NOT Mari!

=item I<{mr}> : Marathi

=item I<{chm}> : Mari

NOT Maori!

=item I<{mh}> : Marshall

eq Marshallese.

=item I<{mwr}> : Marwari

=item I<{mas}> : Masai

=item [I<{myn}> : Mayan languages]

=item I<{men}> : Mende

=item I<{mic}> : Micmac

=item I<{min}> : Minangkabau

=item I<{i-mingo}> : Mingo

eq the Irquoian language West Virginia Seneca.  NOT New York Seneca!

=item [I<{mis}> : Miscellaneous languages]

Don't use this.

=item I<{moh}> : Mohawk

=item I<{mo}> : Moldavian

eq Moldovan.

=item [I<{mkh}> : Mon-Khmer (Other)]

=item I<{lol}> : Mongo

=item I<{mn}> : Mongolian

eq Mongol.

=item I<{mos}> : Mossi

=item [I<{mul}> : Multiple languages]

Not for normal use.

=item [I<{mun}> : Munda languages]

=item I<{nah}> : Nahuatl

=item I<{na}> : Nauru

=item I<{nv}> : Navajo

eq Navaho.  (Formerly i-navajo.)

=item I<{nd}> : North Ndebele

=item I<{nr}> : South Ndebele

=item I<{ng}> : Ndonga

=item I<{ne}> : Nepali

eq Nepalese.  Notable forms: ne-np ne-in.

=item I<{new}> : Newari

=item I<{nia}> : Nias

=item [I<{nic}> : Niger-Kordofanian (Other)]

=item [I<{ssa}> : Nilo-Saharan (Other)]

=item I<{niu}> : Niuean

=item I<{non}> : Old Norse

(Historical)

=item [I<{nai}> : North American Indian]

Do not use this.

=item I<{se}> : Northern Sami

eq Lappish.  eq Lapp.  eq (Northern) Saami.

=item I<{no}> : Norwegian

Note the two following forms:

=item I<{nb}> : Norwegian BokmE<aring>l

(A form of Norwegian.)  (Formerly no-bok.)

=item I<{nn}> : Norwegian Nynorsk

(A form of Norwegian.)  (Formerly no-nyn.)

=item [I<{nub}> : Nubian languages]

=item I<{nym}> : Nyamwezi

=item I<{nyn}> : Nyankole

=item I<{nyo}> : Nyoro

=item I<{nzi}> : Nzima

=item I<{oc}> : Occitan (post 1500)

eq ProvenE<ccedil>al, eq Provencal

=item I<{oji}> : Ojibwa

eq Ojibwe.

=item I<{or}> : Oriya

=item I<{om}> : Oromo

=item I<{osa}> : Osage

=item I<{os}> : Ossetian; Ossetic

=item [I<{oto}> : Otomian languages]

Group of languages collectively called "OtomE<iacute>".

=item I<{pal}> : Pahlavi

eq Pahlevi

=item I<{i-pwn}> : Paiwan

eq Pariwan

=item I<{pau}> : Palauan

=item I<{pi}> : Pali

(Historical?)

=item I<{pam}> : Pampanga

=item I<{pag}> : Pangasinan

=item I<{pa}> : Panjabi

eq Punjabi

=item I<{pap}> : Papiamento

eq Papiamentu.

=item [I<{paa}> : Papuan (Other)]

=item I<{fa}> : Persian

eq Farsi.

=item I<{peo}> : Old Persian (ca.600-400 B.C.)

=item [I<{phi}> : Philippine (Other)]

=item I<{phn}> : Phoenician

(Historical)

=item I<{pon}> : Pohnpeian

=item I<{pl}> : Polish

=item I<{pt}> : Portuguese

eq Portugese.  Notable forms: pt-pt pt-br.

=item [I<{pra}> : Prakrit languages]

=item I<{pro}> : Old ProvenE<ccedil>al (to 1500)

eq Old Provencal.  (Historical.)

=item I<{ps}> : Pushto

eq Pashto.  eq Pushtu.

=item I<{qu}> : Quechua

eq Quecha.

=item I<{rm}> : Raeto-Romance

eq Romansh.

=item I<{raj}> : Rajasthani

=item I<{rap}> : Rapanui

=item I<{rar}> : Rarotongan

=item [I<{qaa}>-I<qtz> : Reserved for local use.]

=item [I<{roa}> : Romance (Other)]

NOT Romanian!  NOT Romany!  NOT Romansh!

=item I<{ro}> : Romanian

eq Rumanian.  NOT Romany!

=item I<{rom}> : Romany

eq Rom.  NOT Romanian!

=item I<{rn}> : Rundi

=item I<{ru}> : Russian

NOT White Russian!  NOT Rusyn!

=item [I<{sal}> : Salishan languages]

Large language group.

=item I<{sam}> : Samaritan Aramaic

NOT Aramaic!

=item [I<{smi}> : Sami languages (Other)]

=item I<{sm}> : Samoan

=item I<{sad}> : Sandawe

=item I<{sg}> : Sango

=item I<{sa}> : Sanskrit

(Historical)

=item I<{sat}> : Santali

=item I<{sc}> : Sardinian

eq Sard.

=item I<{sas}> : Sasak

=item I<{sco}> : Scots

NOT Scots Gaelic!

=item I<{sel}> : Selkup

=item [I<{sem}> : Semitic (Other)]

=item I<{sr}> : Serbian

eq Serb.  NOT Sorbian.

=item I<{srr}> : Serer

=item I<{shn}> : Shan

=item I<{sn}> : Shona

=item I<{sid}> : Sidamo

=item I<{sgn-...}> : Sign Languages

Always use with a subtag.  Notable forms: sgn-gb sgn-ie sgn-ni sgn-us.

=item I<{bla}> : Siksika

eq Blackfoot.  eq Pikanii.

=item I<{sd}> : Sindhi

=item I<{si}> : Sinhalese

eq Sinhala.

=item [I<{sit}> : Sino-Tibetan (Other)]

=item [I<{sio}> : Siouan languages]

=item I<{den}> : Slave (Athapascan)

("Slavey" is a subform.)

=item [I<{sla}> : Slavic (Other)]

=item I<{sk}> : Slovak

eq Slovakian.

=item I<{sl}> : Slovenian

eq Slovene.

=item I<{sog}> : Sogdian

=item I<{so}> : Somali

=item I<{son}> : Songhai

=item I<{snk}> : Soninke

=item I<{wen}> : Sorbian languages

eq Wendish.  eq Sorb.  eq Lusatian.  eq Wend.  NOT Venda!  NOT Serbian!

=item I<{nso}> : Northern Sotho

=item I<{st}> : Southern Sotho

eq Sutu.  eq Sesotho.

=item [I<{sai}> : South American Indian (Other)]

=item I<{es}> : Spanish

Notable forms:
es-ar es-bo es-cl es-co es-do es-ec es-es es-gt
es-hn es-mx es-pa es-pe es-pr es-py es-sv es-us
es-uy es-ve 

=item I<{suk}> : Sukuma

=item I<{sux}> : Sumerian

(Historical)

=item I<{su}> : Sundanese

=item I<{sus}> : Susu

=item I<{sw}> : Swahili

eq Kiswahili

=item I<{ss}> : Swati

=item I<{sv}> : Swedish

Notable forms: sv-se sv-fi.

=item I<{syr}> : Syriac

=item I<{tl}> : Tagalog

=item I<{ty}> : Tahitian

=item [I<{tai}> : Tai (Other)]

NOT Thai!

=item I<{tg}> : Tajik

=item I<{tmh}> : Tamashek

=item I<{ta}> : Tamil

=item I<{i-tao}> : Tao

eq Yami.

=item I<{tt}> : Tatar

=item I<{i-tay}> : Tayal

eq Atayal.  eq Atayan.

=item I<{te}> : Telugu

=item I<{ter}> : Tereno

=item I<{tet}> : Tetum

=item I<{th}> : Thai

NOT Tai!

=item I<{bo}> : Tibetan

=item I<{tig}> : Tigre

=item I<{ti}> : Tigrinya

=item I<{tem}> : Timne

eq Themne.  eq Timene.

=item I<{tiv}> : Tiv

=item I<{tli}> : Tlingit

=item I<{tpi}> : Tok Pisin

=item I<{tkl}> : Tokelau

=item I<{tog}> : Tonga (Nyasa)

NOT Tsonga!

=item I<{to}> : Tonga (Tonga Islands)

(Pronounced "Tong-a", not "Tong-ga")

NOT Tsonga!

=item I<{tsi}> : Tsimshian

eq Sm'algyax

=item I<{ts}> : Tsonga

NOT Tonga!

=item I<{i-tsu}> : Tsou

=item I<{tn}> : Tswana

Same as Setswana.

=item I<{tum}> : Tumbuka

=item I<{tr}> : Turkish

(Typically in Roman script)

=item I<{ota}> : Ottoman Turkish (1500-1928)

(Typically in Arabic script)  (Historical)

=item I<{tk}> : Turkmen

eq Turkmeni.

=item I<{tvl}> : Tuvalu

=item I<{tyv}> : Tuvinian

eq Tuvan.  eq Tuvin.

=item I<{tw}> : Twi

=item I<{uga}> : Ugaritic

NOT Ugric!

=item I<{ug}> : Uighur

=item I<{uk}> : Ukrainian

=item I<{umb}> : Umbundu

=item I<{und}> : Undetermined

Not a tag for normal use.

=item I<{ur}> : Urdu

=item I<{uz}> : Uzbek

eq E<Ouml>zbek

=item I<{vai}> : Vai

=item I<{ven}> : Venda

NOT Wendish!  NOT Wend!  NOT Avestan!

=item I<{vi}> : Vietnamese

eq Viet.

=item I<{vo}> : VolapE<uuml>k

eq Volapuk.  (Artificial)

=item I<{vot}> : Votic

eq Votian.  eq Vod.

=item [I<{wak}> : Wakashan languages]

=item I<{wal}> : Walamo

eq Wolaytta.

=item I<{war}> : Waray

Presumably the Philippine language Waray-Waray (SamareE<ntilde>o),
not the smaller Philippine language Waray Sorsogon, nor the extinct
Australian language Waray.

=item I<{was}> : Washo

eq Washoe

=item I<{cy}> : Welsh

=item I<{wo}> : Wolof

=item I<{x-...}> : Unregistered (Private Use)

"x-" is a prefix for language tags that are not registered with ISO
or IANA.  Example, x-double-dutch

=item I<{xh}> : Xhosa

=item I<{sah}> : Yakut

=item I<{yao}> : Yao

(The Yao in Malawi?)

=item I<{yap}> : Yapese

eq Yap

=item I<{yi}> : Yiddish

Formerly "ji".  Sometimes in Roman script, sometimes in Hebrew script.

=item I<{yo}> : Yoruba

=item [I<{ypk}> : Yupik languages]

Several "Eskimo" languages.

=item I<{znd}> : Zande

=item [I<{zap}> : Zapotec]

(A group of languages.)

=item I<{zen}> : Zenaga

NOT Zend.

=item I<{za}> : Zhuang

=item I<{zu}> : Zulu

=item I<{zun}> : Zuni

eq ZuE<ntilde>i

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<I18N::LangTags|I18N::LangTags>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND DISCLAIMER

Copyright (c) 2001 Sean M. Burke. All rights reserved.

You can redistribute and/or
modify this document under the same terms as Perl itself.

This document is provided in the the hope that it will be
useful, but without any warranty;
without even the implied warranty of accuracy, authoritativeness,
completeness, merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose.

Email any corrections or questions to me.

=head1 AUTHOR

Sean M. Burke, sburkeE<64>cpan.org

=cut


# To generate a list of just the two and three-letter codes:

#!/usr/local/bin/perl -w

require 5; # Time-stamp: "2001-03-13 21:53:39 MST"
 # Sean M. Burke, sburke@cpan.org
 # This program is for generating the language_codes.txt file
use strict;
use LWP::Simple;
use HTML::TreeBuilder 3.10;
my $root = HTML::TreeBuilder->new();
my $url = 'http://lcweb.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/bibcodes.html';
$root->parse(get($url) || die "Can't get $url");
$root->eof();

my @codes;

foreach my $tr ($root->find_by_tag_name('tr')) {
  my @f = map $_->as_text(), $tr->content_list();
  #print map("<$_> ", @f), "\n";
  next unless @f == 5;
  pop @f; # nix the French name
  next if $f[-1] eq 'Language Name (English)'; # it's a header line
  my $xx = splice(@f, 2,1); # pull out the two-letter code
  $f[-1] =~ s/^\s+//;
  $f[-1] =~ s/\s+$//;
  if($xx =~ m/[a-zA-Z]/) {   # there's a two-letter code for it
    push   @codes, [ lc($f[-1]),   "$xx\t$f[-1]\n" ];
  } else { # print the three-letter codes.
    if($f[0] eq $f[1]) {
      push @codes, [ lc($f[-1]), "$f[1]\t$f[2]\n" ];
    } else { # shouldn't happen
      push @codes, [ lc($f[-1]), "@f !!!!!!!!!!\n" ]; 
    }
  }
}

print map $_->[1], sort {; $a->[0] cmp $b->[0] } @codes;
print "[ based on $url\n at ", scalar(localtime), "]\n",
  "[Note: doesn't include IANA-registered codes.]\n";
exit;
__END__

