=pod

=head1 NAME

Locale::Language - standard codes for language identification

=head1 SYNOPSIS

   use Locale::Language;

   $lang = code2language('en');        # $lang gets 'English'
   $code = language2code('French');    # $code gets 'fr'

   @codes   = all_language_codes();
   @names   = all_language_names();

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The C<Locale::Language> module provides access to standard codes used
for identifying languages, such as those as defined in ISO 639.

Most of the routines take an optional additional argument which
specifies the code set to use. If not specified, the default ISO
639 two-letter codes will be used.

=head1 SUPPORTED CODE SETS

There are several different code sets you can use for identifying
languages. The ones currently supported are:

=over 4

=item B<alpha-2>

This is the set of two-letter (lowercase) codes from ISO 639, such
as 'he' for Hebrew.

This code set is identified with the symbol C<LOCALE_LANG_ALPHA_2>.

This is the default code set.

=item B<alpha-3>

This is the set of three-letter (lowercase) bibliographic codes from
ISO 639, such as 'heb' for Hebrew.

This code set is identified with the symbol C<LOCALE_LANG_ALPHA_3>.

=item B<term>

This is the set of three-letter (lowercase) terminologic codes from
ISO 639.

This code set is identified with the symbol C<LOCALE_LANG_TERM>.

=back

=head1 ROUTINES

=over 4

=item B<code2language ( CODE [,CODESET] )>

=item B<language2code ( NAME [,CODESET] )>

=item B<language_code2code ( CODE ,CODESET ,CODESET2 )>

=item B<all_language_codes ( [CODESET] )>

=item B<all_language_names ( [CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::rename_language  ( CODE ,NEW_NAME [,CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::add_language  ( CODE ,NAME [,CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::delete_language  ( CODE [,CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::add_language_alias  ( NAME ,NEW_NAME )>

=item B<Locale::Language::delete_language_alias  ( NAME )>

=item B<Locale::Language::rename_language_code  ( CODE ,NEW_CODE [,CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::add_language_code_alias  ( CODE ,NEW_CODE [,CODESET] )>

=item B<Locale::Language::delete_language_code_alias  ( CODE [,CODESET] )>

These routines are all documented in the Locale::Codes man page.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over 4

=item B<Locale::Codes>

=item B<Locale::Constants>

=item B<http://www.loc.gov/standards/iso639-2/>

Source of the ISO 639 codes.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

See Locale::Codes for full author history.

Currently maintained by Sullivan Beck (sbeck@cpan.org).

=head1 COPYRIGHT

   Copyright (c) 1997-2001 Canon Research Centre Europe (CRE).
   Copyright (c) 2001-2010 Neil Bowers
   Copyright (c) 2010-2011 Sullivan Beck

This module is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.

=cut
